                                                                                                                                                                                ISSN 0240-8937

                                   •

           BULLETIN
du MUSEUM NATIONAL
d'HISTOIRE NATURELLE

                                                                                                                                                                            :

                                                                               PUBLICATION TRIMESTRIELLE

                                                              SECTION B

                 ADANSONIA

                                                                                                                                          •

                                 botanique

                                                            phytochimie

4 e SERIE T. 9 1987 № 1

                                         Janvier-Mars 1987
                                              BULLETIN

                                                     du

               MUSÉUM NATIONAL D'HISTOIRE NATURELLE

                                                 57, rue Cuvier, 75005 Paris

                                          Directeur : Professeur E. R. BRYGOO

                                   Section B : ADANSONIA (BOTANIQUE)

              Directeur : Professeur P H . MORAT, Laboratoire de Phanérogamie.
              Rédacteur : J. JÉRÉMIE.
              Comité de lecture : J. BOSSER, Paris ; E. BOUREAU, Paris ; F . EHRENDORFER, Vienne ;

                         F . R. FOSBERG, Washington ; F . HALLE, Montpellier ; N. HALLE, Paris ; J.-L. HAMEL,

                    Paris ; V. H. HEYWOOD, Reading ; L. A. S. JOHNSON, Sydney ; S. JOVET, Paris ;
                      C. KALKMAN, Leiden ; L. LACOSTE, Paris ; J . - F . LEROY, Paris ; A. LE THOMAS, Paris ;
                      R. LETOUZEY, Paris ; D. MOLHO, Paris ; R. E. G. PICHI-SERMOLLI, Perugia ; P.
                      H. RAVEN, St Louis ; R. SCHNELL, Paris ; A. TAKHTAJAN, Leningrad ; M. VAN
                    CAMPO, Montpellier.

                            La revue publie des articles en français ou en anglais, consacrés aux divers
                     aspects de la botanique : systématique, biologie, écologie, anatomie, palyno-
                     logie, phytochimie, etc.

                                                Recommandations aux auteurs

      Les manuscrits doivent être adressés directement à la Rédaction d'Adansonia, Laboratoire de
Phanérogamie, Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle, 16, rue Buffon, 75005 PARIS, tél. 43.36.47.25.
Ils sont examinés par les responsables de la revue, puis soumis à des rapporteurs.

      Le texte doit être dactylographié, en double interligne, et se conformer aussi strictement que
possible à la présentation de la revue, tout particulièrement en ce qui concerne les têtes d'articles
(titres, résumés français-anglais, adresse), les citations bibliographiques, les listes de synonymes,
les clés.

      La nomenclature utilisée devra respecter les règles du Code International de Nomenclature
Botanique. La citation des auteurs doit être complète et non abrégée. Dans le texte, les références
bibliographiques sont réduites aux noms d'auteurs suivis de la date de publication, renvoyant
ainsi aisément à la liste bibliographique de fin d'article. Celle-ci doit être présentée par ordre alpha-
bétique des noms d'auteurs, et chronologique pour les travaux d'un même auteur. Les références
doivent être complètes : auteur(s), date, titre d'article, ouvrage ou revue, volume, pages, planches.

      Dans le texte, aucun mot ne doit apparaître en majuscules, et seuls doivent être soulignés
les groupes de mots que l'auteur désire faire ressortir en italiques.

      Illustrations : Le format maximum des illustrations publiées est de 170 x 145 mm. Les dimen-
sions des originaux devront donc être proportionnelles à celles des illustrations imprimées. Les dessins
et les cartes doivent être réalisés sur bristol blanc pu calque ; les photographies seront le plus nettes
possible, sur papier blanc brillant. Les figures constituant les éléments d'une même planche doivent
être numérotées en chiffres arabes.

      Tirés à part : 50 tirés à part seront fournis gratuitement par article.

                                                             S'adresser :

          — pour la R E D A C T I O N , à Adansonia, Laboratoire de Phanérogamie, Muséum national
                    d'Histoire naturelle, 16, rue Buffon, 75005 Paris, tél. 43.36.47.25.

          — pour les A B O N N E M E N T S et A C H A T S , au Service de vente des Publications du Muséum,
                    38, rue Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, 75005 Paris, tél. 43.31.71.24; 43.31.95.60. CCP Paris
                    9062-62.

          — pour les É C H A N G E S , à la Bibliothèque Centrale du Muséum national d'Histoire natu-
                    relle, 38, rue Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, 75005 Paris, tél. 43.31.71.24 ; 43.31.95.60.
                                        Abonnements pour l'année 1987 (Prix h.t.)

          Abonnement général (Section A, B, C) : 1500 F .
          Section A : Zoologie, biologie et écologie animales : 860 F .
          Section B : Adansonia, botanique : 400 F .
          Section C : Sciences de la Terre, paléontologie, géologie, minéralogie : 400 F .

                       Numéro d'inscription à la Commission paritaire des publications et agences de presse : 1404 AD
          BULLETIN DU MUSÉUM NATIONAL D'HISTOIRE  NATURELLE

          4e série, 9, 1987, section B, ADANSONIA, n° 1.

          SOMMAIRE — CONTENTS

SACHET, M.-H.f — The littoral species of Sesbania (Leguminosae) in the South

Pacific islands and its relatives                                                           3

L'espèce littorale de Sesbania (Leguminosae) dans les îles du Pacifique Sud et les espèces
affines.

BOSSER, J . , CADET, T h . | & GUÉHO, J . — Nouvelles observations sur des Syzygium

(Myrtaceae) des Mascareignes                                                                29

New observations on Syzygium species (Myrtaceae) from the Mascarene Islands.

LEBRUN, J . - P . , STORK, A. L. & WÛEST, J . — Une nouvelle espèce de Polycarpaea

(Caryophyllaceae) d'Afrique tropicale                                                       39

A new species of Polycarpaea (Caryophyllaceae) from tropical Africa.

KLACKENBERG, J . — Revision of the genus Tachiadenus (Gentianaceae)                         43

Révision du genre Tachiadenus (Gentianaceae).

DEROIN, T. — Anatomie florale de Meiocarpidium Engler & Diels (Annonaceae-

Unoneae)                                                                                    81

Floral anatomy of Meiocarpidium Engler & Diels (Annonaceae-Unoneae).

BARNETT, L. C. — Two new species of Nesogordonia (Sterculiaceae) from Mada-

gascar                                                                                      95

Deux nouvelles espèces de Nesogordonia (Sterculiaceae) de Madagascar.

MIQUEL, S. — Morphologie fonctionnelle de plantules d'espèces forestières du Gabon.. 1 0 1
      Functional morphology of forest species from Gabon.
                                                Bull. Mus. natn. Hist, nat., Paris, 4C ser., 9, 1987,
                                                            section B, Adansonia, n° 1 : 3-27.

              The littoral species of Sesbania (Leguminosae)

                in the South Pacific islands and its relatives

                                                                       M.-H. SACHET!

             Summary : Discussion of the history, occurence, and typification of Sesbania coccínea (L. f.)
             Poiret, of Polynesia and New Caledonia, followed by a review of Sesbania sect. Agati
             (Adans.) Baker, recognizing six species, two of them new, one of these, Sesbania mannii pro-
             posed here as new, the other remaining unnamed, for lack of adequate specimens. The
             identity of Sesbania formosa (F. Muell.) Burbidge is clarified. Sesbania coccínea is analyzed
             in detail recognizing two subspecies, subsp. coccínea from the western Pacific (Fiji, Tonga,
             and New Caledonia) and subsp. atollensis, from eastern Polynesia. Within subsp. atollensis
             are recognized five varieties, atollensis, marchionica, quaylei, parkinsonii, and tuamotensis.
             Keys are provided for the species of subg. Agati, and for the subspecies and varieties of Ses-
             bania coccínea. Sesbania tomentosa is treated only briefly and traditionally, as it is the sub-
             ject of research by Miss Winona CHAR, in Hawaii.

             Résumé : L'historique, la distribution et la typification de Sesbania coccínea (L. f.) Poiret, de
             Polynésie et de Nouvelle-Calédonie, sont discutés et suivis d'une révision de Sesbania sect.
             Agati (Adans.) Baker. Six espèces sont reconnues parmi lesquelles deux sont nouvelles : Ses-
             bania mannii Sachet est décrit tandis que l'autre espèce demeure innomée en raison de
             l'absence de matériel suffisant. L'identité de Sesbania formosa (F. Muell.) Burbidge est clari-
             fiée. Sesbania coccínea est étudié en détail ; deux sous-espèces sont distinguées : subsp. coccí-
             nea du Pacifique ouest (Fiji, Tonga, Nouvelle-Calédonie) et subsp. atollensis de l'est de la
             Polynésie. Cinq variétés sont reconnues au sein de la sous-espèce atollensis : var. atollensis,
             var. marchionica, var. quaylei, var. parkinsonii et var. tuamotensis. Des clés de détermination
             des espèces du sous-genre Agati et des sous-espèces et variétés de Sesbania coccínea sont don-
             nées. Sesbania tomentosa, dont l'étude à Hawaii constitue le sujet de recherche de M l l e W.
             CHAR, est ici traité de manière brève et classique.

            Marie-Hélène Sacheff, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, Was-
            hington, D.C. 20560, U.S.A.

         HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION AND TYPIFICATION OF SESBANIA COCCINEA

       The plants of the South Pacific islands were first brought to the notice of European
botanists by scientific voyages, one of the earliest being Capt. James COOK'S first expedition

in the Endeavour ( 1 7 6 8 - 1 7 7 1 ) . Joseph BANKS and Daniel SOLANDER were the botanists,

and Sydney PARKINSON one of the artists. He drew and painted almost 1,000 portraits of
plants.

      Why the botanical results of the expedition were not published as a flora, with descrip-
tions of many new species, has been explained many times, and lately in a volume devoted

to PARKINSON'S work and its significance (CARR, 1 9 8 3 ) . The chapter on the Society Islands
                                                              —4—

plants by F. R. FOSBERG and myself (1983, pp. 76-107) includes nomenclatural information
on the paintings chosen to be reproduced in the volume. How some of the manuscript
names applied to collections of the first voyage were published by the botanists of the
second voyage (J. R. & G . FORSTER) and by others (e.g. SEEMANN) has also been discussed
repeatedly in botanical literature.

      One of the most beautiful PARKINSON paintings from the Society Is. (CARR, 1983, pi.
79) represents a leguminous shrub or small tree which must have been fairly common on
coral strands in the Tuamotu and Society Islands, and for which SOLANDER'S manuscript
name is Aeschinomene speciosa. It has large pea-flowers of vivid orange and red combina­
tions of colors, often an orange background marked with a wash, spots or streaks of bright
red. It is also illustrated in a sketch by G . FORSTER, preserved in the British Museum (Nat.
Hist.), and labelled Aeschynomene coccinea, from Raiatea local name " owaij " .

       This plant was still common in the Tuamotus at the time of the Bishop Museum
Mangarevan Expedition (in 1934) and can still be found on some atolls. I collected it on
Rangiroa in 1963 and in Takapoto in 1974. It has not been reported from any of the high
islands of the Society group in recent years, but survived in Tetiaroa in 1973 and in Tupai
Atoll where it was collected in 1974 and 1983, and observed in 1981.

       The names used for this plant have been discussed by H. ST. JOHN (ST. JOHN & PHILIP-
SON, 1962, p p . 184-186), who renamed it Sesbania atollensis St. J o h n , followed by A . C .
SMITH (1978, p p . 401-402). Curiously, both these authors mention the name Sesbania coc­
cinea ( L . f.) Poir., but d o not explain what it is, n o r why they d o not apply it t o the plant
in question. Earlier, E. D. MERRILL (1954, p. 347) had also discussed and dismissed this
n a m e . The epithet " coccinea " is so singularly appropriate for this plant, besides being
the earliest (1781), that it appeared necessary to study it anew. It was used on some of the
collections made during COOK'S first voyage as well as on the second (by the Forsters) and
in G . FORSTER'S Prodromus (1786, p. 51, n. 273).

       LINNAEUS filius first published the epithet coccinea in 1781 (Suppl. pi. : 330) as

follows :

       " Coccinea aeschynomene arborea, foliis pinnatis ; foliolis numerosis linearibus obtusis pulveru-
      lentis, leguminibus compressis aequalibus.
      Habitat in Nova Zeelandia. Eques Back.
      Flores maiores, rubri. "

       Here appears the first element of confusion : No plant that could correspond to this
 description occurs in New Zealand. It seems obvious that it is an error for New Caledonia :
G . FORSTER used this name in 1786, giving the locality as " Societatis insulae, Botanicesque
 insula " (Botany island is a small coral island between New Caledonia and Isle of Pines,
 considered to be the same as Amere I.), and it appears in FORSTER'S hand on collections
 from the Society Islands and New Caledonia. MERRILL had noted that " New Caledonia
 was intended ".

       Another element of confusion arises from the fact that many authors have considered
 LINNAEUS f.'s name as synonymous with A. grandiflora ( L . ) L . ( = Sesbania grandiflora
 ( L . ) Poir.). MERRILL (1954) maintained this disposition, repeating his remarks of 1917
 (p. 267). The alleged synonymy involves RUMPHIUS names' and plates and will be discussed
 below.
Pl. 1. — Sesbania coccinea subsp. coccinea : Forster herbarium sheet, no. 144 (Paris). By courtesy of Laboratoire
      de Phanérogamie, Muséum, Paris.
                                                               —6—

      The really curious thing is that while G . FORSTER mentioned one of these plates,
" Toeri-Mera. Rumph. amb. I. t. 77 " , he discounted in the next sentence the possibility of
Aeschynomene coccinea applying t o the same plant as A. grandiflora (L.) L. : " Differentia
specifica A. grandiflorae emendanda, ut ab hac distinguatur " , but no one seems to have
noticed this. In any case, the relevant facts about the application of A. coccinea L. f. are
that LINNAEUS f. described a new species from New Zealand [ = New Caledonia], undoub­
tedly using a FORSTER manuscript name, and cited a specimen from the Back herbarium,
and that this specimen, which is the type of his species, is extant. It is a FORSTER collec­
tion, from " N. Zeeland " in the J. E . SMITH Herbarium, no. 1208.5, at the Linnean
Society. How some of the Forsters' duplicate collections came into A. BACK'S herbarium,
were described by LINNAEUS f., and ended up in the J. E . SMITH'S herbarium at the Linnean
Society rather than in the BACK or Linnean Herbaria is documented by JUEL (1924), and
discussed further by EXELL (1931).

       I have seen many specimens of the Polynesian plant, and collected it on several atolls
but until late 1981 I had never seen a specimen of the strand Sesbania from New Caledonia,
and had not paid too close attention to FORSTER'S " Botanicesque insula " because the
localities for many of the Forsters' plants include several island groups and specimens cannot
always be found to match all the records. It is well recognized that the first botanists (and
zoologists) in the tropics, overwhelmed by the unbelievable numbers of " novelties " they
encountered, tended not to recollect something they thought had already been preserved, or
even to discard " inferior " specimens for " better " ones found elsewhere, which may or
may not have been the same thing.

      Then I was asked to name a plant from Lifou Island (Loyalty Is. near New Caledonia)
by the collector, Dr. Maurice SCHMID (no. 1033), and I called it Sesbania coccinea (L. f.) Poi-
ret. In the herbarium at Kew, I found another specimen from the Loyalty Is., Daniker
2214 from Ouvea. These two are very similar, with leaves crowded at the tip of the twigs
and folioles crowded and thickened as in halophytes. They have the same habitat, a rocky
limestone strand exposed to sea spray. Other specimens at Kew and in the BM Herbarium
have the same habit, and they are all from the New Caledonia area, collected on COOK'S
second voyage. They match the SMITH Herbarium sheet, so that the type of Sesbania coc­
cinea (L. f.) Poir. var. coccinea must be from that area, Botany Island or Isle of Pines. I
have seen no collections made between COOK'S second voyage (1774) and DANIKER'S explo­
ration (1924).

       At Kew and in the BM Herbarium, there is also a good series of specimens from Poly­
nesia, most of them from the first two COOK voyages. They have the light feathery habit
of the beautiful PARKINSON painting and are matched by 19th and 20th centuries collec­
tions, including my own. In addition to habit, these two groups differ in details, which
will be described below. If they are considered different species, names are available, Ses­
bania coccinea (L. f.) Poir. for the New Caledonia group and S. marchionica F. Brown for
the Polynesian one.

       A. C. SMITH (1978) has reported the species as S. atollensis St. J o h n from the Lau
Islands of Fiji, but curiously, it is not known from other coral islands such as the Cook Is.
or Niue. It may well occur on some of them, however, since it is nowhere very common
and can easily be missed.
PI. 2. — Painting of Aeschynomene speciosa (= Sesbania coccinea var. parkinsonii) drawn and painted on
      Captain COOK'S first voyage around the world, by Sydney PARKINSON, from living plant, at Tahiti. By cour­
     tesy of the Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History), London.
                                                                           —8—

                                                   THE GENUS SESBANIA ADANSON

S E S B A N I A Adans. con. Scopoli.

      Intr. : 308 (1777), nom. cons. ; DC., Prodr. 2 : 264 (1825) ; BAKER, Fl. Brit. India 2 : 114
(1876) ; GILLETT, Kew Bull. 17 (1) : 91-159 (1963).
— Sesban ADANS., Fam. 2 : 327 (1763) ; POIR. in LAM., Encycl. Meth. 7 : 126 (1806).
— Agati ADANS., Fam. 2 : 326 (1763) ; DESVAUX, Jour. Bot. 1 : 120, t. 4, f. 6 (1813) ; D C , Prodr.

    2 : 264 (1825).
      SCOPOLI did not propose a new name but only latinized ADANSON'S orthography, therefore combi­

nations in Sesban are valid in Sesbania (ICBN 75.1, 75.3, 1983).

      Trees, shrubs or herbs ; leaves pari-pinnately compound, leaflets usually numerous ; sti­
pules present, small, usually caducous ; stipels present or absent ; inflorescence axillary,
racemose, bracteate and bracteolate ; flowers very zygomorphic ; calyx campanulate to
somewhat gibbous, variously lobed or subtruncate ; corolla with petals tending to be clawed,
vexillum subequal with wings and keel, with or without appendages near base ; stamens dia-
delphous, vexillary free ; ovary with many ovules, stigma small ; fruit linear, transversely
septate.

       Many species in tropical, subtropical and warm temperate regions ; two or more native
and several introduced in Pacific oceanic islands. The Indo-Pacific species are regarded
here as belonging to two subgenera following BAKER (/. c), subg. Sesbania and subg. Agati.

                      STATUS OF SUBGENUS AGATI (Adanson) Desvaux ex Baker

       ADANSON'S genus Agati, typified by Robinia grandiflora L., is cited above as a
synonym of Sesbania but was accepted and maintained as a genus by most botanists for the
first hundred years after its publication. DESVAUX ( 1 8 1 3 ) placed 4 species in Agati : gran­
diflora, coccinea, cannabina and virgata " which used to be s, " but DE CANDOLLE ( 1 8 2 5 )
kept only the first two : cannabina he placed in Sesbania, and virgata in his new genus
Coursetia. BAKER ( 1 8 7 6 ) reduced Agati to subgeneric rank under Sesbania and placed only
Sesbania grandiflora in it, considering S. coccinea as a synonym or at most as a name for a
redder form. This disposition of Agati has been followed in recent treatments by GILLET
(1963), BURBIDGE (1965) and others. No one however, has stated clearly the differences
between these two subgenera.

       BURBIDGE placed two species in subg. Agati, S. grandiflora and S. formosa. S. coccinea
(L. f.) Poir., S. tomentosa H . & A. and its allies endemic in Hawaii, and two close relatives
of S. grandiflora described below, also belong here. The species of subgenus Agati will be
briefly described and discussed, as they have been confused or not satisfactorily
separated. Sesbania coccinea, extending from New Caledonia eastward across the south
Pacific to eastern Polynesia will be treated here in detail.

       Subgenus Agati has been vaguely considered to include the large-flowered members of
Sesbania, BAKER adding that the flower buds are curved rather than straight. The pods
                                                              —9—

have not been used in defining the two subgenera discussed here. (Two more subgenera
include only African or American species). Most Sesbania descriptions do not mention
whether or not the pods are dehiscent, or simply say that they are (POLHILL & SOUSA, 1981 :
284). However, in none of the specimens of S. coccinea or S. tomentosa and in only two
or three of the scores of sheets examined of S. grandiflora, I have seen dehiscent pods and
these only very tardily so. There is no published information on the ripe pods of the Aus­
tralian S. formosa (F. Mueller) Burbidge, but through the courtesy of Dr. Colin WOODROFFE,
I have received nearly mature pods {Woodroffe 598, U S ) . They do not seem to dehisce
spontaneously, but some of the more mature ones split when sharply bent. These pods
are thinner and less stiff than those of the other three species and may be more sponta­
neously dehiscent when older. In any event, the tendency toward indehiscence of the pods
can be accepted as a feature of subgenus Agati.

Contrasting characters of the two subgenera in the Indo-Pacific region follow :

                       Subg. Sesbania                                 Subg. Agati

Flowers usually less than 3 cm long.         Flowers large, 3 cm or more in length.
Flower buds straight or slighly curved.      Well developed flower buds strongly curved.
Pods dehiscent (so far as known to me).      Pods indéhiscent or valves separating only very

Chromosomes 2n = 12, occasionally 2n = 24.     tardily as when bent or under pressure.
Plants tending to be herbaceous or becoming  Chromosomes 2n = 24, larger.
                                             Plants woody, up to tall trees.
  woody below, occasionally shrubs.

       This comparison shows how the subgenera are set apart and at the same time supports
their disposition as subgenera rather than genera.

       The chromosome numbers cited above for subgenus Sesbania are summarized from
tables in GILLET (I.e., p p . 96-97) and various atlases of chromosomes numbers. For subge­
nus Agati, we were fortunate to obtain seeds of three species, and Mr. Royce OLIVER made
counts on root tips as follows : Sesbania grandiflora (J. Florence s.n., Arue, Tahiti, 17 July
1984) ; S. formosa (Woodroffe 599, Old Kapalga Floodplain, N . T . , Australia) ; S. coccinea
subsp. atollensis (Sachet 2036, T a k a p o t o Atoll, T u a m o t u ) . All have 2n = 24. The num­
ber reported for the S. tomentosa group from Hawaii is also 24 (W. C H A R , personal com­
munication ; CARR, Amer. Jour. Bot. 65 : 236-242, 1978).

       Besides S. coccinea and S. formosa, two other species have been confused or lumped
with S. grandiflora. They have apparently never been described and named. One of these
is described here and named mannii. The other is described and discussed following S.
grandiflora which it resembles except for smaller flowers and bilabiate calyx. I do not pro­
pose a name for it because of the inadequacy of the single available specimen.

      The five (or six) species of this subgenus may usually be distinguished by the following
key. Material available to me of the Javanese plant is so poor that it should not serve as
type of a new species, at least until an effort is made to relocate the plant. We have seen
very little of S. mannii, but it is well-enough characterized that a name should be made
available for it and attention directed to it.
                            — 10 —

                    KEY TO SPECIES OF SESBANIA SUBG. AGATI

1. Calyx opening by a circumscissile dehiscence or splitting irregularly or into 2 unequal triangular

lobes or along convex side                                                   S. grandiflora

1. Calyx not opening by circumscissile dehiscence, margin of mature calyx with 5 definite lobes or

bilabiate                                                                    2

2. Calyx bilabiate                                            Sesbania sp. (from Java)

2. Calyx with 5 triangular lobes or somewhat acuminate teeth                 3

3 . Calyx in bud with a differentiated apical portion with 5 tomentose ridges joining in an acute

point                                                                        S. formosa

3. Calyx in bud fusiform, apex merely pointed, not differentiated or ridged  4

4. Calyx 1.5-3 cm long, cylindric, narrower than long                        S. mannii

4. Calyx about 1-2 cm or less long, more or less campanulate                 5

5. Plants appearing notably hairy, vexillum strongly reflexed, pods rarely reaching 2 0 cm

           long                                                              S. tomentosa (s.l.)

5. Plants green, leaves usually sparsely strigose, young growth often densely so or sericeous,

           vexillum only somewhat reflexed, mature pods mostly well over 2 0 cm long.. S. coccinea

                                                               DESCRIPTION OF SPECIES

       Sesbania grandiflora (L.) Poir.

      Encycl. Meth. 7 : 127 (1806), as Sesban ; PERS., Syn. 2 : 3 1 6 (1807), as Sesban.

— Robinia grandiflora L . , Sp. P I . : 7 2 2 (1753).
— Aeschynomene grandiflora ( L . ) L . , Sp. P L , ed. 2 : 1060 (1762).
— Agati grandiflora ( L . ) DESV., Jour. Bot. 1 : 120, t. 4 (1813).

       Small or medium trees, loosely branching, very young parts densely tomentose, soon
glabrate ; leaves about up to 30 cm long, with 15 to 20 pairs of leaflets, these oblong to
elliptic, apices rounded to subtruncate or slightly emarginate, (2.5)-3 to 4(-4.5) x (0.8)1 to
1.5(-1.8) cm, pairs opposite but rarely a few distal ones alternate ; stipules small, ovate,
thin, caducous when very young ; racemes axillary, 5 to 9 cm long not counting flowers,
few-flowered with small ovate-acuminate bracts subtending flower-buds, these bracts cadu­
cous when very young ; flowers 9 to 11 cm long, buds arcuate ; calyx closed in young buds,
fusiform, apex acuminate, tomentose, not differentiated, either splitting longitudinally along
the convex side making a spathe-like calyx, or irregularly or into 2 unequal triangular lobes,
or breaking in a circumscissile manner, the distal portion remaining like a cap on the end
of the bud almost until the flower opens, leaving the cylindric to campanulate lower part
of the calyx thus irregularly truncate or irregularly toothed, rather than regularly 5-toothed
or 2-lobed, 1-2 cm long ; flower white or rose-pink to red, opening tardily ; vexillum some­
what to quite reflexed, without calli ; keel-petals with a sharp lobe near base of the concave
margin ; staminal tube about 10-12 cm long, geniculate or auriculate near base ; anthers
bluntly lanceolate, 4-4.5 mm long ; pods hanging vertically on elongate inflorescence rhachi-
ses, stiff, indéhiscent (rarely tardily splitting especially if bent or twisted), rectangular in
cross-section, to 63 x 0.7 x 0.4 cm including the 3-5 cm stipe and 2-3 cm beak ; seeds 8
x 4-4.5 mm, oblong, slightly curved, ends rounded, dull brown.
PI. 3. — Sesbania grandiflora : Habit, young bud showing undifferentiated apex, older buds showing circumscis­
     sile dehiscence of calyx, open flower and mature fruit. Drawing by Alice TANGERINI.
                                                             — 12 —

      Unfortunately satisfactory collections of this species are not abundant and descriptions
are likely to be incomplete or imperfect. The features of the circumscissile opening of the
calyx and of the indehiscence (or very tardy dehiscence) of the pods have possibly not been
described before. The tardy dehiscence when bent was only seen in one Polynesian collec­
tion, Decker 1607, a planted tree in U a h u k a , Marquesas Islands, and a clear but very tardy
dehiscence in two tropical American collections.

       SPECIMENS EXAMINED FROM SE POLYNESIA. — MARQUESAS Is. : Fatuhiva I., Omo'a village, plan­
ted, Decker 2728, 2729 (US), pink flowers. Uahuka I., Vaipae'e village, planted, Decker 1607 (US),
dry pods. — SOCIETY Is. : Tahiti, Auae, planted, Florence 3381 (US 2 sheets), flowers maroon, young
pods ; Fosberg 63109 (US, BISH, POM, P), flowers bright rose, immature pods ; A.E. Wolf
(Sachet's) 2704 (US), flowers white ; Fosberg 64992 (US), flowers white ; Papeari, Gauguin Museum
grounds, planted, Fosberg 64988 (US), flowers a deep rose-pink. Huahine, outskirts of Fare, planted,
Fosberg 61128 (US, BISH, POM), flowers red, pods not quite mature. Raiatea, Uturoa airport, plan­
ted, Fosberg 64985A (US), flowers deep rose-pink. Tahaa I., Pueheru, NW coast of I., Fosberg &
Sachet 63409 (US), flowers rose ; baie d'Otuone, cote W, Florence 5275 (US, BISH, P, Papeete), flo­
wers purplish-red. — TUAMOTU IS. : Raroia, Doty & Newhouse 11906b (US), flower pink, depauperate
specimen (the BISH sheet of this number is S. coccinea var. atollensis).

       Sheets in US from Guam, Saipan, Fiji, Samoa, Hawaii, Borneo, Sumatra, etc. Also
known from New Caledonia, Australia, Ceylon, India, the Laccadive Is., Indochina, Philip­
pines, as well as tropical Africa and America. Flowers eaten as fritters in Southeast Asia
and the Philippines. Country of origin not known, perhaps India.

   Sesbania sp.

       It seems impossible, if one has seen living plants of S. coccinea and S. grandiflora, t o
believe they could be taken for the same species, as MERRILL and other authors
did. However, depauperate or poor specimens of S. grandiflora can be misleading. Part
of the basis for the confusion rests with the two Rumphian plates, t. 76 Turia and t. 77
Toeri-Mera (Turia minor).

       Turia minor R u m p h . is supposed to illustrate a smaller variety with purple red flowers.
Examination of specimens in several herbaria, and inquiries from curators of others, have
failed to locate any collections matching RUMPHIUS' description of Turia minor either in
looks, origin, native name or any other way, with one possible exception. This one sheet,
Angarwulan 172, is the only one I have been able to locate that might match RUMPHIUS'
Turia minor, t. 77. A description of it follows.

       " Tree " up to 2.5 m high, stems glabrate, but when very small (young ?) densely
puberulent, leaves up to 18 cm long, sparsely puberulent, soon glabrate, leaflets up to 14-15
pairs, oblong to narrowly elliptic, up to 20 x 6 mm, apex subtruncate, costa very slightly
apiculate, base rounded ; stipules very small ovate-scale-like, puberulent ; inflorescence a
small loose, few-flowered puberulent raceme, terminal on slender leafy branchlets, lateral
on twigs, rhachis zig-zag, several cm long, inflorescence branches of several short internodes,
then a very short pedicel expanding into a turbinate receptacle, this and calyx glabrous ;
calyx somewhat bilabiate, slightly inflated, tube about 1 cm long and wide, cylindric or sub-
ventricose, lower lobe about 2.5 mm long, acute or slightly dentate, slightly recurved, upper
                                                              — 13 —

lobe about 6 mm long, broadly obtuse or slightly irregularly dentate ; corolla " purplish
red " , strongly arcuate, about 6-7 cm long around outer curve, claws of petals about 2 cm
long ; staminal tube exserted, about 7 cm long, only 6-7 stamens apparent ; style about
same length as stamens ; fruit about 36 cm long, about 7 mm wide, 4-5 mm thick, laterally
slightly constricted between about 25 seeds, sutures flat, about 2-2.5 mm wide, beak about
4-4.5 mm long, stout ; seed broadly oblong 6.5 x 4 mm, smooth, dark brown, ends sub-
truncate.

       The bilobed calyx and more strongly curved corolla, smaller than that of S. grandi­
flora suggest that this may well represent a different species, but the quality of the single
specimen available does not justify setting up a new taxon. It can scarcely be RUMPHIUS'
Turia minor, as the calyx of that, so far as it can be made out from his plate 77, seems to
be dentate rather than bilabiate. The plate, however, is not very clear.

       SPECIMEN EXAMINED. — INDONESIA, JAVA : Jiwan, Madiun, 63 m, Angarwulan 172 ( L ) .

       I considered the possibility that this plant might be Sesbania javanica M i q . , a rather
large-flowered species, of which I have seen no critrically identified material. However, it
does not match MIQUEL'S description (Fl. Ind. Bat. 1 : 288, 1855) of his species, which he
placed in Sesbania (together with his own Sesbania grandiflora) while maintaining Agati for
A. grandiflora Desv. Both of MIQUEL'S species (combined under S. javanica in recent
works) have long racemes of (5)-6 to 10(15) flowers.

       Sesbania mannii Sachet, sp. nov.

      Arbor (?), sparse strigosa mox glabrata ; folia 10-15 maxime 25 cm longa, 11-20 jugata, foliola
oblonga vel oblongo-elliptica, maxime 4 x 1.2 cm, mucronata ; racemi axillares laxi pauciflori, pedi-
cellis 3-3.5 cm longis; flores 8 cm longi; calyx cylindricus basi subobliquus vel subventricosus 1.5-2.5
 x 1-1.5 cm, margine 5-dentati, dentibus triangularibus vix acuminatis; corolla vexillo recurvato-
carinato vix falcato 5-7 cm longo; legumen non vel vix torulosum subteres transverse subrhombicum,
suturis non-incrassatis, stipite 5 cm, rostro 13-14 mm longo.

TYPE : Mann & Brigham 589, Hawaiian Is., Kauai, Waimea (nolo-, GH ; iso-, US, BISH).

       Two early collections from Hawaii, referred earlier by us and others to S. grandiflora,
differ from it in several respects and can scarcely fit the circumscription adopted here for
this species. The differences from S. grandiflora, so far as the limited material available
shows, are : pubescence strigose, thinner than usual, early glabrate ; leaflets more narrowly
oblong or elliptic, apex rounded with a slender mucro ; bud opening by separation of defi­
nite teeth, these strigose, acute, calyx tube at anthesis somewhat oblique or subventricose,
1.5-2 (-2.5) x 1-1.5 cm (when pressed), teeth triangular acuminate, 3-5 m m long, mature
buds and just opening corollas 6-7 cm long, fruit to 35 cm long, 5 x 3 m m wide and thick,
elliptic or subrhombic rather than rectangular in cross section (possibly not quite mature).

       This could be included in the broadest circumscription of S. grandiflora by ignoring the
peculiar calyx dehiscence of S. grandiflora and the more slender and differently shaped
pods of the M A N N & BRIGHAM collection. Such a course would hide these very real dif­
ferences. It would be desirable to have for examination a broader sample of S. grandi-
                                                              — 14 —

flora, in order to be certain that this curious Hawaiian plant was not, as is likely, an intro­
duction from elsewhere. One very incomplete specimen, Gaumer 670 from Yucatan, has
the calyx similar to that described here but somewhat smaller. It may be the
same. Perhaps the present account will serve to call attention to the problem.

       SPECIMENS EXAMINED. — HAWAIIAN Is. : " Sandwich Island " : U.S. Exploring Expedition (US).
Kauai : Waimea, Mann & Brigham 589, type.

       Sesbania formosa (F. Mueller) Burbidge

       Austr. Jour. Bot. 13 ( 1 ) : 103-141 (1965).

— Agati formosum F. MUELLER, Fragm. 2 : 8 8 (1860).

       Agati formosum, like Sesbania (Agati) coccínea, was denied an identity of its own by
Australian botanists and confused with S. grandiflora until BURBIDGE examined it closely.
Both species are trees, and have very large flowers. Beyond this, their differences are
clear.

       The following description is based on specimens examined, but amplified in a few pla­
ces from that of BURBIDGE (I.e.).

       Tree t o 10 m tall, with rough, furrowed bark, young growth glabrous to somewhat
appressed pubescent, glabrate with maturity ; leaves to 40 cm long, with up to 18 pairs of
opposite to subopposite leaflets, these narrowly ovate to elliptic or broadly lanceolate, with
slender subulate mucros, stipellate or stipels obsolete ; stipules ovate or ovate-lanceolate,
curled and involute on drying, caducous ; racemes to 12 cm long, loose, few-flowered, pedi­
cels to 3 cm long at anthesis, bracts (bracteoles) small, early caducous, buds ovoid fusi­
form, from the first showing a broadly ovoid 5-angled terminal portion set off by a slight
constriction, the angles notably tomentose, opening gradually with the corolla pushing out
and spreading the very distinct triangular calyx lobes, these with thickened margins
tomentose-ciliate, calyx when mature campanulate broader than long, lobes broadly triangu­
lar, apex obtuse, but abruptly mucronate ; flower said to be white or creamy, or cream-
green ; corolla in bud curved distally, to 12-14 cm long measured around the convex side,
vexillum broadly obovoid, strongly clawed, base of blade cordate, without calli, wing petals
asymmetrically elliptic, clawed, curved, tips connate, keel petals strongly curved, with a
long claw, and a sharply acuminate lobe near the base of the concave margin, convex mar­
gins connate to near the narrow tips ; staminal column subequal with or slightly exceeding
the corolla, strongly " auriculate " or geniculate near base, anthers broadly linear, about
3.5 mm long, style slightly exceeding stamens, stigma minute, oblique, slender ; fruit to
60 cm long, stipe to 5 cm long, beak 3-5 cm, in cross section somewhat rhombic ; seeds
narrowly oblong, 5-7 x 2 x 1.5 m m , dull black, hilum circular, hilar side of seed not at
all concave, hilum with a white ring and a black pit inside it, ends of seed rounded to sub-
truncate.

      This species, by some authors united with S. grandiflora, differs clearly from that spe­
cies in the ovoid 5-angled limb of the bud, differentiated from very early into the 5
tomentose-margined broadly triangular calyx lobes, broadly campanulate calyx, more
strongly cordate vexillum, wing-petals connate distally, sharply acuminate rather than acute
PI. 4. — Sesbania formosa : Habit, young bud showing differentiated apex, older buds showing lobed calyx limb,
      open flower, and mature fruit (fruit from material sent by Colin WOODROFFE, Darwin, N . T., Australia). Dra­
      wing by Alice TANGERINI.
                                                                           — 16 —

lobes on keel-petals, and in the much more slender fruit, rhombic rather than rectangular in
cross-section, valves thinner with much less thickened margins ; seeds much narrower. In
both species, the calyx remains at the base of the young pod but eventually breaks off and
slides down the pod and off.

      Sesbania formosa was described from the Northern Territory of Australia, and is ende­
mic to the tropical area of northwestern Australia (Northern Territory and Western Austra­
lia) with a record from Cape York, Queensland. It is found on river banks and wide allu­
vial plains or swamps.

      SPECIMEN EXAMINED. — N . W . AUSTRALIA, s.l. : von Mueller s.n. (P), one pod only (very pro­
bably this rather than S. grandiflora). — WESTERN AUSTRALIA : between the Ashburton and DeGray
rivers, Dr. E. Clement s.n. in 1897 (P) " cork wood " (part of a leaf with a few folioles, quite a few
buds in different stages of growth, showing the toothed calyx very well). Banks of the Lower
Ashburton River, Alex Morrison s.n., 12.10.1905 (P, 2 sheets ; US, 2 sheets). King Leopold Ranges,
2 2 mi SSW of Mt. House Station, Kimberleys, M. Lazarides 6457 (US) " Commonly fringing stream
channels with Eucalyptus camaldulensis and Imperata cylindrica var. major'" (under this number,
photos showing habit of tree with hanging flower clusters, and detail of corky deeply fissured bark).
— NORTHERN TERRITORY : Old Kapalga Floodplain, South Alligator River, N . T . , Woodroffe 598 (US,
immature pods only) and 599 (US, seeds only) ; same locality, seasonally fresh water inundated
" black soil " plains, Woodroffe 699 (US), flowering twigs. Near Wavehill Police station, N . T . ,
sandy river bank near water, R. A. Perry 2241 (US). Near Buffalo Hill, 9 mi NNW of Leguna Sta­
tion, N . T . , estuarine plain with Melaleuca sp., Themeda sp. and Heteropogon sp., R. A. Perry 2600
(US).

       Sesbania tomentosa H o o k . & A r n . , s.l.

       Bot. Beechey Voy. : 2 8 6 ( 1 8 4 1 ) [1838].

— Agati tomentosa (Hook. & Arn.) NUTT. ex A . GRAY, Bot. U.S. Expl. Exped. 15 ( 1 ) : 409-410

     (1854).

       I have used this name, sensu latissimo, for the complex of taxa endemic to the
Hawaiian Islands, because although some have been differentiated and named as varieties
or even species, recent work involving the whole complex has not been published as yet (W.
C H A R , pers. comm.). Sesbania tomentosa s.s. was described from " Acapulco " but in fact
is from Oahu Island, the collector, G. T. LAY, who remained on Oahu while the Expedition
went to the North Pacific, being too ill to travel to any other island. In Hawaii, the ship
Sulphur stopped only in Oahu and Niihau (BEECHEY, 1 8 3 1 , 1 : 2 3 1 - 2 3 4 , 2 : 410-411).

       There are taxa in this group from all or most of the volcanic islands, from Necker to
Hawaii, and they vary in stature, habit, tomentum and other characters ; their differences
usually appear greater than those separating the varieties in Sesbania coccinea subsp. atol-
lensis.

       I offer here a short description of S. tomentosa in the traditional sense, to place it in
subgenus Agati. A detailed treatment, distinguishing a number of segregate species will be
published by Winona CHAR, of the University of Hawaii.

       Sesbania tomentosa H o o k . & A r n . , sensu lato :

       Prostrate to erect shrubs and small slender trees, from usually notably tomentose or
sericeous, to strigose or rarely almost glabrous ; leaves (6-) 8 - 1 5 (-20) cm long, varying from
                                                               — 17 —

  scattered along several d m of branchlet to congested on the distal few cm, with 6 t o 12
 (-15) pairs of leaflets, these oblong, 1-2.5 x 0,5-1.2 cm, rounded at both ends, mucronu-
 late ; stipules linear-lanceolate, acuminate, caducous ; racemes axillary, slender, few flo­
 wered, much shorter than leaves ; young buds densely sericeous, fusiform, apical portion
 somewhat differentiated, acute, lobes early becoming separated ; older buds straight to
 somewhat curved ; calyx cup-shaped, usually as broad as long or broader, slightly but not
 conspicuously inflated, sharply lobed or toothed, teeth acute to almost subulate ; flowers at
 anthesis 4-5 cm long, vexillum reflexed, usually bearing two prominent calli on the inner
 surface of the claw below the base of the blade (W. CHAR, pers. comm.) ; fruit 10-15,
 rarely to 20 cm long, at maturity becoming subterete, somewhat torulose, straight to
 somewhat arcuate, about 4 m m wide, 2.5-3 m m thick, stipe 5-8 (-15) m m , beak 10-15 m m ;
 seed oblong, 4-5 x 2.5 x 3 mm, smooth, brown, ends rounded, hilum side slightly con­
 cave.

       Sesbania coccinea (L. f.) Poir.

        Encycl. Méth. 7 : 127-128 (1806) ; SEEM., Fl. Vit. : 5 4 (1865).

 — Aeschynomene coccinea L. F., Suppl. PI. : 3 3 0 ( 1 7 8 1 ) ; FORST. F., Prodr. : 5 1 (1786) ; MURRAY,
       Syst. Veg. ed. 1 4 : 6 7 1 (1784).

 — Coronilla coccinea (L. f.) WILLD., Sp. PI. 3 : 1146 ( 1 8 0 2 ) .

 — Sesbania coccinea (L. f.) POIR., Diet. 7 : 127 (1806), as Sesban.
 — Agati coccinea (L. f.) DESV., Jour. Bot. 3 : 120, t. 4 , f. 6 (1813) ; D C , Prodr. 2 : 2 6 6 (1825) ;

      GUILLEMIN, Zephyritis Taitensis : 62-63 (1837).
 — Aeschynomene speciosa SOL. ex SEEM., Fl. Vit. : 5 5 ( 1 8 6 5 ) .

— Agati tomentosa sensu NADEAUD, Enum. PI. Ind. Tahiti : 7 9 (1873), non (H. & A.) NUTT. ex

      GRAY, Bot. U.S. Expl. Exped. 1 5 ( 1 ) : 4 0 9 - 4 1 0 (1854).

— Sesbania speciosa F. BROWN, Bishop Mus. Bull. 1 3 0 : 1 1 0 (1935), nom. illeg., non S. speciosa

      TAUB. ex ENGLER 1 8 9 4 .

— Sesbania marchionica F. BROWN, Bishop Mus. Bull. 130 : 109-110 (1935).
— Sesbania atollensis ST. JOHN, Trans. R. Soc. N . Z. Botany 1 : 184-186, f. 9 (1962) ; SMITH, Aller-

      tonia 1 : 401-406 (1978).

— Sesbania grandiflora sensu auct., non (L.) POIR., Encycl. Méth. 7 : 127 (1806).

       Shrub or small slender tree to 6 m tall ; leaves with many pairs of leaflets, up to seve­
ral cm long ; stipules linear or lanceolate-subulate, stipels none ; calyx campanulate, with 5
triangular teeth ; corolla 3-4 cm long, rather falcately curved, vexillum becoming somewhat
reflexed or recurved, subequal with or slightly shorter than keel, claw subequal with calyx,
blade broadly elliptic to oval or slightly obovate, yellow to usually orange and dark red
mixed, or red ; fruit linear, up to 25-30 cm long, sharply beaked, somewhat stipitate, terete
to somewhat compressed and slightly swollen between septa ; seed suborbicular to oblong,
hard, glossy.

      Type from Botany Island, New Caledonia (said in error to be from New Zealand), coll.
Forster [labelled in FORSTER'S hand, published as Eques Back] (LINN). Range from New
Caledonia to Henderson Island, eastern Polynesia. Its closest relationship appears to be
with S. tomentosa s.l. of the Hawaiian Islands.
                                                                             — 18 —

      Sesbania coccínea is a variable species and may be interpreted as comprising a number
of geographically more or less well-separated infra-specific taxa. The plants from the wes­
tern part of the range are here treated as subspecies coccínea. Collections are too few and
inadequate to warrant its segregation into varieties, though the Fiji and Tonga plants may
turn out, with more collections, to be separable. Subspecies atollensis occurs from the
Society Islands eastward and northward.

       GUILLEMIN ( 1 8 3 7 , p . 6 3 ) quotes an excellent description of " Agati coccínea Desv. "
from " Forst. mss " . This is presumably from a manuscript by J . R . FORSTER in the
Bibliothéque Céntrale of the Paris Museum, kindly brought to my attention by Dr. H. HEINE,
who says that in the manuscript there is a note " varietas in insula arenosa prope Novam
Caledoniam " . GUILLEMIN gives the locality as " Ins. Societ. (Forst.) " , but the statement
in the quoted description " Legumen pedicellatum cylindraceum " clearly indicates subspe­
cies coccínea, from New Caledonia. The note by FORSTER seems to indicate that he rea­
lized that there were two varieties in Aeschynomene coccínea, the New Caledonia one and
the one collected and sketched in the Society Islands (see var. parkinsonii).

       The type specimen of Aeschynomene coccínea L. f. is a single branch with leaves and
inflorescences congested distally, pubescence scanty, appressed, leaves with 5 - 1 1 pairs of
pinnae, these apparently rather thick, oblong, base somewhat contracted, obtuse, apex trun­
cate to very slightly emarginate, very slightly apiculate, midrib prominent, lateral veins not
evident, petiolule short but evident, rachis thickish, appearing rather stiff ; no flowering
racemes evident, but one damaged crumpled flower, calyx lobes triangular, slightly strigose,
pods narrow-linear, appearing oblong in cross-section, 3 - 4 times as long as leaves, held
erect, beak slender, sharp.

       A dissection of a flower of Schmid 1033, from the Loyalty Islands, kindly done for me
by J . LEWIS of BM, showed two round appendages (or better calli) at the base of the vexil-
lum, with little ledges near their bases, a character which he had not seen before in the
genus. A. C. SMITH (in litt., 1 9 8 2 ) mentioned obtusely deltoid appendages on the Fijian
plant. H e pointed out that S T . J O H N did not mention such appendages on S. atollensis and
wondered if S T . JOHN could have simply missed them. However, on a pickled flower of
Sachet 2007, from T a k a p o t o , and some from Tikehau Atoll, T u a m o t u Islands, as well as
on fresh flowers from Tikehau plants cultivated in Tahiti, there are no such calli,
whatever. The wing and keel petals of S. speciosa var. tuamotensis, as illustrated by F .
BROWN ( 1 9 3 5 , p. I l l ) , have each a single projection (" auricle " ) , but the vexillum has
none. The presence or absence of calli on the vexillum is one of the characters separating
the New Caledonia-Fiji plants from the SE Polynesian ones, as seen in the following key :

                     KEY TO SUBSPECIES AND VARIETIES OF SESBANIA COCCÍNEA

1. Basal few mm of peduncle with hairs appressed, leaflet blade noticeably sparsely strigose, vexillum

with 2 calli within toward base, pod very terete                           (subsp. coccínea)

1. Basal few mm of peduncle with hairs usually spreading, leaf blades usually only obscurely sparsely

strigose, plant very rarely completely glabrous, vexillum lacking calli, pod more or less compressed

(subsp. atollensis)                                                        2
                                                               — 19 —

Pl. 5. — Sesbania coccinea, two subspecies showing different habit : Forster sheet (Uppsala). Right hand plant,
      subsp. coccinea ; left hand plant, subsp. atollensis. By courtesy of the Botanical Museum, Uppsala.
                                     — 20 —

2. Leaflets at apex rounded to subtruncate or emarginate             3

3. Apiculus conspicuous, plant glabrous except for base of peduncle  var. quaylei

3. Apiculus inconspicuous, young growth, at least, pubescent         4

4. Flowers yellow, leaflet slightly emarginate at apex, seeds black, orbicular, var. marchionica

4. Flowers orange to maroon, leaflet rounded at apex, seeds greenish-yellow, oblong or sub-

cylindric                                                            var. parkinsonii

2. Leaflets narrowly ovate or oblong-ovate, tapering somewhat toward apex, apex somewhat poin­

ted, slightly or markedly apiculate                                  5

5. Leaf-tips notably apiculate (apiculus approaching 1 mm), leaflets ovate, 3.5-5 cm long, essen­

tially glabrous                                                      var. tuamotensis

5. Leaf-tips slightly apiculate (apiculus usually 0.5 mm or less), leaflets elliptic to ovate or broadly

lanceolate, mostly less than 3.5 cm long, usually sparsely and inconspicuously strigose, or very

rarely plant entirely glabrous                                       var. atollensis

      Sesbania coccinea (L. f.) Poir. subsp. coccínea

      Shrub or small tree, 0.4-7 m tall, young growth tending to be sparsely strigose or seri­
ceous to minutely tomentulose or pulverulent, leaves and racemes congested in the distal
7-8 cm of the branchlets, leaves to 10 cm long, shortly petiolate, pinnae 10-16 pairs subop-
positely arranged, 10-15 m m apart, petiolule 1 mm or less long, blade oblong 15-20 x 5-7 m m ,
subfleshy or subcoriaceous, apex truncate or subtruncate to very slightly emarginate,
minutely mucronulate, base rounded to subtruncate, very slightly asymmetric, upper sur­
face very sparsely strigose, lower glabrous or almost so ; racemes among leaves, 3-5-
flowered, shorter than leaves, the basal internode (peduncle) more or less strigose or seri­
ceous, pedicels curved, 8-12 mm long, flowers 2.5-4 cm long ; calyx cylindro-campanulate,
6-8 x 5-6 m m , teeth slightly acuminate to very broad and obtuse to almost lacking ; vexil-
lum with 2 calli at base of blade ; young fruit strigose, when mature terete (Tonga collec­
tion subterete but possibly not quite mature), 5-6 mm or more suture to suture, to
8 mm wide, not or scarcely constricted between seeds ; seed oblong with rounded ends, dull
t o subglossy black to brown, 5-7 x 2.5-4 x 1.7-2 m m .

       DISTRIBUTION : New Caledonia, Loyalty Islands, Fiji, and Tonga.

      SPECIMENS EXAMINED (described in some detail to identify individual sheets). — " N. Zeeland "
[New Caledonia] : s. coll. [G. Forster] (FORSTER'S hand) 1208.5 (LINN), holotype. — [New
Caledonia], s.l. : Herb. Pallas, G. Forster (BM) labeled " Aeschynomene coccinea a Cat. Forsters " ,
(one leafy branch, with 2 pods, one with chewed-up flowers). G. Forsters Herbarium (BM) labeled
on front of sheet : " 166 [Forster's no.] " " 273. Aeschynomene coccinea-io\\\s succulentibus " (273 is
Prodromus no., p. 51). Forster 144 (P) mounted on typical FORSTER paper, identified as Aeschyno­
mene coccinea in the border frame and as Agati on sheet (one leafy branch with a pod, and frag­
ments). — " Society Island, et Botany Island " : Forster (UPS, Herb. Thunberg 17139), labeled
Aeschynomene coccinea (2 leafy twigs, the one on the right with congested leaves and inflorescences, 2
pods, is very similar to all the above ; the other is probably var. parkinsonii). Botany Island near
New Caledonia, Forster Herb, [from Liverpool] (K) determined as Aeschynomene coccinea carnosa
Willd. (Very like COOK specimen, very long pods 30 cm long). — " Nova Caledonia, 1775, Capt.
 Cook (Botany Island) " (BM) (top of woody branch, with many leaves in good condition, inflores­
 cences of several large buds, one with small buds, 3 pods). " New Caledonia, Isle of Pines, W.
Anderson [in] 1774 " (BM) (2 twigs, 1 with young buds, 2 young pods ; 1 with young buds, 2 poor
 flowers, 1 ripe ? pod). — Loyalty Islands : Lifou, au sud de Kode, fin de la route, M. Schmid 1033
 (BM, P, US) " Arbuste 4-5 m ; fleurs jaunes [or orange] ; au pied de la falaise au bord de la mer ;
                                                               — 21 —

PI. 6. — Sesbania coccinea var. atollensis : Tuamotu Archipelago, Tikehau Atoll, J. Florence 3676, showing leaves,
      flowers, and fruits. By courtesy of Jacques FLORENCE.
                                                              — 22 —

buissons tabulaires isolés ; sur sol peu profond " . (Tips of branch with leaves in good condition, 1
young pod, flowers in pocket in poor condition ; the US sheet has buds and a thick mature pod).
Lifou, 21.2.1974, MacKee 28285 (P), flowering specimen. Ouvéa Atoll, Civa-ni-muda I., Daniker
2214 (K, Z, 7 sheets, 4 with flowers and young fruit, 3 with mature pods only) ; " 30-40 cm hohes
Stráuchlein, mit roten Blüten auf exponierten Felsender Sprayzone " . — Fiji Archipelago : Lau Group
(raised limestone and coral beaches), Naiau I., beach, Mrs. J. D. Tothill 103 (K, 2 sheets, a few
leaves, two pods on 1 sheet, 15-17 cm long) " flowers red but smaller than described for S. grandi­
flora. Small tree 5-7 m " . Yacatha (Yathata) I., Naberawavula, Cakandrove, very common coastal
plant, Koroiveibau (Dept. of Agriculture) 15540 (BISH, K, branch tip, folióles rather long, 2-3 flo­
wers) " small tree, 12-15 ft, flowers pinkish yellow, pod 6-8 " . Vatu Vara, Koroiveibau (Dept. of
Agriculture) 17708 (BISH). Fulanga, near sea, Bryan 443 (BISH, US). Marambo I., sand beach,
Bryan 517 (BISH, US). Vernacular name in Fijian " vai vai " . Fiji specimens have leaflets oblong,
apex truncate to slightly emarginate, scarcely apiculate, very sparsely sericeous, more on under side
than upper, leaves on 17708 rather close, about 20 cm long, flowers about 3 cm long, but damaged, a
better flower on 517 less than 3 cm, hairs on base of peduncle (517) appressed, pods when mature
(443) 13-20 cm long, completely terete, 6-8 mm in cross-section, wider than thick (suture to suture
called thick), seeds oblong, 4 x 6 mm, dull black. — Tonga : Vavau, Crosby 46 (K) [printed label]
" Islands July 1891, Mrs Hanson " [handwritten ticket], determined as Sesbania tomentosa A. Gray,
has leaves rather congested, to 23 cm long, thinly sericeous (densely sericeous when very young), lea­
flets oblong, only slightly narrowed toward apex, to 3 x 1 cm, opposite or almost so, apices obtusely
rounded, scarcely mucronate or apiculate ; flowering inflorescences 4 cm (excluding flower), fruiting
7 cm, flowers 3.5-4 cm, calyx sparsely sericeous, 1 cm long, 5 mm wide, lobes low triangular, fruit to
 18 cm long, 6 mm wide, subterete, beak to 3 mm, stipe 2 cm, calyx cylindric even in fruit.

       Sesbania coccínea subsp. atollensis (St. John) Sachet, stat. nov.

— Sesbania atollensis ST. JOHN, Trans. R . Soc. N. Z., Botany 1 : 184-186, f. 9 (1962).

       Plants tending to be only slightly sericeous, leaves loosely arranged on distal parts of
 branches, not or seldom crowded ; leaflets 10-16 pairs, glabrous or only very slightly stri­
 gose beneath ; basal internode of raceme with pubescence spreading, often very sparse ;
 racemes 4-6-flowered ; flowers 3.5-4 cm long, vexillum so far as observed lacking calli ;
 fruit compressed to only subterete when fully mature, sutures somewhat to scarcely thicke­
 ned.

        This subspecies varies somewhat from island to island and is here treated as compri­
 sing five varieties. These are not very sharply separated and more collections may confirm
 their validity or break them down. I have not been able to examine the Henderson Island
 specimen, Lintott H-l, cited by S T . J O H N (1962) so cannot place it in a variety.

        DISTRIBUTION : Society Islands, Tuamotu Archipelago, Marquesas and Henderson

 Island.

        Sesbania coccínea subsp. atollensis var. atollensis

 — Sesbania atollensis ST. JOHN, Trans. R . Soc. N. Z., Botany 1 : 184-186, f. 9 (1962).

        Plant only sparsely sericeous (or densely so on very young growth), glabrate or rarely
 glabrous ; leaflets elliptic to broadly lanceolate or sub-ovate, apex rounded with muero
 about 0.5 mm or less long, very sparsely strigose or glabrate beneath, seeds oblong, olive to
 dark brown or black.
                                                              — 23 —

      Found, so far as known, in western or west-central Tuamotu atolls, type from Raroia
Atoll.

      SPECIMENS EXAMINED. — TUAMOTU ARCHIPELAGO : Raroia Atoll : Tetou, Doty & Newhouse 11835
(BISH, holotype of S. atollensis, A, isotype) ; Oneroa, Doty & Newhouse 11559 (BISH) ; Ng[aru-
maoa] Village, Doty & Newhouse 11906 b (BISH sheet only). Touamotu, s.L, Barrau in 1955 (P)
" plages coralliennes ... très belles fleurs écarlates ... kofai " . Rangiroa Atoll, Avea I., Sachet 1380
(US). Tikehau Atoll, Barrau (MacKee's) 3125 " kofai " ; Teonai village, Koenig (Florence's) 3676
(Papeete) ; Motu Teonai, Florence 6953 (US, BISH, P, NY, Papeete) ; Motu Temaruopapahia, Teoa,
Florence 6952 (P, Papeete), flowers red orange ; Tahiti, Musée de Tahiti et des Iles, planted from
seeds of Koenig (Florence's) 3676, Fowler 15 (US), fallen flowers only. Mataiva Atoll, Motu
Tamiano, June 1985, in flower and fruit, Delesalle (Sachet's) 2706 (US). Tahanea Atoll (near Anaa),
Whitney Exped. [Beck] 2000 (BISH) ; Whitney Exped. [Beck] 2004 (BISH, BKL). Takapoto Atoll, S
side of Atoll, between village and first pass (Paopaoa) Orapa, along lagoon, Sachet 2036 (US, BISH,
P), only specimen seen of Sesbania coccinea that is completely glabrous ; a plant grown from a seed
of this collection is likewise glabrous, even on the youngest growth. Another specimen from Taka-
poto (Sachet 2007) seems intermediate between var. atollensis and var. tuamotensis, see below.

       Sesbania coccinea subsp. atollensis var. marchionica (F. Brown) Sachet, stat. nov.

— Sesbania marchionica F. BROWN, Bishop Mus. Bull. 130 : 109-110 (1935).

       Plant almost glabrous except very youngest growth slightly sericeous, base of peduncle
very slightly spreading pilose, at least when young, leaflets narrowly to broadly oblong to
elliptic or slightly ovate, glabrous or very slightly strigose, apex rounded or subtruncate to
usually slightly emarginate, very shortly apiculate ; flowers yellow to orange ; pods with
somewhat heavy margins ; seeds suborbicular, black.

       SPECIMENS EXAMINED. — MARQUESAS Is., UAHUKA I. : Quayle 1710 (BISH, holotype of S. mar-
chionica, BKL, isotype) ; BKL field label says " Shavay Bay, barren islet off coast, " 150 m alt. tree
5-6 m. flowers " large, orange and yellow, odorless, orchid-shaped " . Ilot Hemeni, Thibault 146
(US, BISH) ; Fatu Iva : Motu tu'i, 400-450 m, Thibault 32 (US).

       Sesbania coccinea subsp. atollensis var. quaylei Sachet, var. nov.

      Folióla glabra anguste oblonga vel elliptica valde apiculata, fructus 7.5 mm latus.

      TYPE : Quayle 1848, Marquesas Is., Uahuka I., s.l. (holo-, BISH).

       Plant slightly pilose only on youngest growth, leaves somewhat congested at tips of
branches, to 13 cm long, leaflets narrowly oblong t o elliptic, to 21 x 6 m m , minutely dark-
red punctate when dry, not at all strigose, muero 1 m m long ; flowers not available ; fruits
when ripe up to 25 cm x 7.5 mm x 4 m m , beak about 1 cm, stipe to 2 cm, gray-brown ;
seeds broadly oblong, 5-5.5 x 4 mm, glossy, very dark brown.

       The combination of somewhat congested leaves, strongly apiculate leaflets and unu-
sually broad pods suggests that, in spite of its occurrence on the same island as var. mar-
chionica, this specimen may represent a distinct population, and is here described as
such. So little is known of var. marchionica that this may be premature, but as the cha-
racters separating these two are similar to those separating other varieties in this species,
attention should be called to this one.
                                                             — 24 —

       Sesbania coccinea subsp. atollensis var. parkinsonii Sachet, var. nov.

      Ab var. atollensis planta partibus juvenibus sericeis glabratis, foliolis sparse strigosis vix ovatis ad
apicem basimque rotundis vel subtruncatis vix mucronatis, differt.

      TYPE : Sachet 1956, Tupai Atoll, east side of atoll, near pass (holo-, US ; iso-, BISH, BM, A,
CHR, MO, Z).

       Small tree, young growth sericeous, glabrate ; leaves loose to somewhat crowded, lea-
flets elliptic to slightly ovate, or oblong, slightly sericeous or pilosulous especially toward
base, base apex rounded or subtruncate, very shortly apiculate ; base of peduncle spreading,
pilose ; flower orange and dark maroon mixed ; fruit up to 25 cm x 4.5 mm X 3.5 mm ;
seed narrowly oblong, to 5 x 2-2.5 mm, greenish or black, or chestnut.

       This is the form originally illustrated by PARKINSON, said to have occurred on Tahiti,
and two old specimens actually so labeled, but no modern collections known from there.
CUZENT, in 1 8 6 0 , says it was, in Tahiti, only known from Taiarapu Peninsula but on the
point of disappearing completely from Tahiti and the Society Islands. Otherwise known
from Moorea, Tetiaroa, and Tupai. Very close to var. atollensis, but more pubescent, lea-
flets less ovate, apex rounded or subtruncate, mucro shorter. Sydney PARKINSON'S painting
(BM) is this variety, which is dedicated to him.

      SPECIMENS EXAMINED. — SOCIETY ISLANDS : " Tahiti, Capt Cook " (BM), young branchlets, lea-
ves disarticulated, some badly damaged flowers, " Aeschinomene speciosa " on ticket. Tahiti,
" Banks and Solander, Cook's first voyage (Society Islands 1769) " (BM). " Sandy Island in oceano
pacifico " J. R. & G. Forster (BM), flowering branch, with scattered leaves. S.I., G. Forster Herba-
rium (BM, 2 sheet), woody branches with scattered leaves, a few folioles, a few damaged flowers, 2
pods on each, labelled " Aeschinomene coccinea a Cat. Forsters " . " Society Island et Botany
Island " , Forster (UPS, Herb. Thunberg 17139) ; the left twig on this sheet is probably var. parkinsonii,
the right one is subsp. coccinea, which see. Raiatea, Forster, pencil drawings 198, 199 (BM), flowering
branch, pod and flower dissection ; " owaij " . Moorea, Vesco (P) " arbuste très joli, assez rare, se
trouve dans l'Ile Moorea dans les bois de Casuarina au bord de la mer. Cette espèce existe surtout
abondt dans toutes les Iles Pomotou " " ouwai " . "Pointe sablonneuse " , Lépine 9 (P, US) arbre de
5 à 6 mètres, " ofaii " . Taiti, Nadeaud ? Herb. Drake (P). Ulhieta [Raiatea], Parkinson painting,
vol. 1, no. 22 (BM) ; native name given in Parkinson plant list as " owhaee " . Tetiaroa Atoll, Tia-
raunu, E. end, Raynal 18001 (P) ; Quayle 190 (BISH, 3 sheets, BKL, BM), the BM sheet labelled
Com. Forest Brown. Tupai Atoll, 3 ft., Grant 4818 (BISH) ; east side of atoll, near pass, Sachet
1956 (US, holotype, BISH, BM, A, CHR, MO, Z, isotypes) ; slender trees to 5 m or more, a few
deformed flowers, young pods and a few ripe ones ; Sachet 2582 (US), ripe pods, fertile seeds, only ;
Sachet 2549 (US), one leaf from young plant in pot brought from Tupai, growing at Papeari garden,
Tahiti.

      Sesbania coccinea subsp. atollensis var. tuamotensis (F. Brown) Sachet, comb. nov.

— Sesbania speciosa var. tuamotensis F. BROWN, Bishop Mus. Bull. 130 : 110 (1935).

      Youngest growth sericeous, glabrate ; leaflets nearly or quite glabrous, large, 3-5 cm
long, 1 cm wide or slightly wider, elliptic to usually somewhat ovate, tapering to a blunt
apex with a prominent mucro or apiculus about 1 mm or more long, often lost on mature
leaflets ; flowers red ; seeds oblong, khaki-brown to reddish brown or dark chestnut.
7. — Sesbania coccinea var. tuamotensis : Holotype specimen (Bishop Museum), showing leaf-shape and
mucronate apex. By courtesy of Bishop Museum, Honolulu.
                                                              — 26 —

      Differs from var. atollensis in larger, tapering leaflets with ovate outline and prominent
mucro, 1 mm long. Certain specimens having smaller leaflets and shorter mucros, are inter­
mediate toward var. atollensis.

      This variety is found on the northern and some west-central T u a m o t u atolls. The type
is from P u k a Puka Atoll.

      SPECIMENS EXAMINED. — TUAMOTU Is. : Puka Puka : interior, 0-10 ft., Brown & Brown 342 (BISH,
holotype of S. speciosa var. tuamotensis) ; reported in 1904 by SEURAT as " kohai " . Tepoto : 2 m,
St. John 14348 (BISH, K, US) " kohai " . Kaukura : Quayle 2183 (BISH). Napuka : Eric Conte
(photos in 1982 and 1985) " kofai " . Aratika : 3 m, Jones 1851 (BISH, BKL). Makemo : H. F.
Moore 349 (US). Takapoto atoll : Tararo, Sachet 2007 (US, BISH, P).

      Certain specimens, Moore 349, Jones 1851 and Sachet 2007 are intermediate with var. atollensis in
their smaller leaflets and shorter mucros.

                               OBSERVATIONS ON LIVING MATERIAL OF SESBANIA COCCINEA

       When I started this investigation, I had seen only a few living plants of Sesbania cocci­
nea subsp. atollensis in SE Polynesia and a few herbarium specimens available in P and
BISH. Most of the fresh flowers were deformed and I feared they might be sterile.
Remarks by CUZENT, NADEAUD and other early observers led me to believe that the species
was disappearing. Indeed it is, but for environmental, not intrinsic, reasons. It thrives
only on coral sandy beach crests and " motu " . It has apparently disappeared from
Tahiti, Moorea and Raitaea sandy areas and motu as a result of human settlement. It
was not found on Maupiti, Tahaa or Huahine, and the name " 'ofai " appears to be
mostly unknown. When Dr. SINOTO asked about it on Huahine, someone recognized the
name, but brought him flowers and pods of Caesalpinia pulcherrima an introduced orna­
mental, the flowers of which are very similar in color to those of the real " 'ofai " .
However, where its habitat has not been transformed, as on Tupai and some of the Tuamo-
tus, subsp. atollensis is a very successful plant. The seeds are very hard and long-lived ;
they germinate readily after scarification (which is probably achieved in nature by the rol­
ling effect of the wet sand) and seedlings grow easily and fast. Thus the plant tends to
form large groves, with many germinations in the undergrowth, in full sun or in the dap­
pled shade of native strand trees or coconut plantations.

      The pods (especially those from Tupai, Sachet 2582) are heavily infested with larvae of
an introduced cerambycid beetle, Oopsis mutator (F.) (larvae raised and beetle identified at
the Insectarium, Tahiti). Fortunately the larvae appear to feed mostly on the inner pith­
like layer of the pod rather than on the tough seeds.

      The unprecedented series of hurricanes which hit the Society and Tuamotu Islands in
1983 destroyed the known stands on Tupai and Tikehau Atolls. The plants were defolia­
ted, uprooted and ploughed under by the force of wind and washing waves. But some
seeds, even though probably buried deep in the sand, survived and restored the populations.
There may be cases where they are wiped out however, if sand is completely washed off or
flooding prolonged.

      Sesbania grandiflora is not cultivated as widely as it might be because it is considered
to be somewhat ungainly in appearance and relatively short-lived. S. coccinea subsp. atol-
                                                                            — 27 —

lensis is probably also short-lived, but the plants are well-shaped a n d their light foliage a n d
beautiful flowers are very attractive. With the rapid development of tourist facilities on
coral beaches of high islands and on atoll motu, I hope it may become popular as an orna-
mental shrub or small tree for the enjoyment of people and for its own survival.

       According to PARKINSON ( 1 7 7 3 , p . 4 3 ) the people of Raiatea planted it around their
houses and decorated themselves with it (cf. SACHET, 1 9 8 3 , p . 3 , 7 ) .

      ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS : Finally, I wish to express my appreciation for the help and cooperation of
the following individuals : C. Dennis ADAMS, Winona CHAR, Eric CONTE, Bruno DELESALLE, Jacques

FLORENCE, F . R. FOSBERG, Mark FOWLER, Michel GUERIN, Heino HEINE, Andre INTES, D. & R. KOENIG,

Peter O'CONNOR and the Bishop Museum herbarium staff, Royce OLIVER, Bernard SALVAT, Maurice
SCHMID, Yosi SINOTO, W. R. THEOBALD and the Pacific Tropical Botanical Garden staff, J.-C. THIBAULT,
Colin WOODROFFE, and Keith WOOLLIAMS and the Waimea Arboretum staff. I must also express my
gratitude to the authorities of the many herbaria which have lent specimens and permitted me to work
in their collections, which are acknowledged by their acronyms in the citations of specimens studied.

                                                     REFERENCES CITED

BEECHEY, F. W., 1831. — Narrative of a voyage to the Pacific ... in His Majesty's ships "Blossom "
         ... 1925-28, 2 vols., London.

BROWN, F. B. H., 1935. — Flora of southeastern Polynesia. III. Dicotyledons. Bishop Mus. Bull.
         130 : 1-236.

BURBIDGE, N. T., 1965. — The Australian species of Sesbania Scopoli (Leguminosae). Austr. Jour.
         Bot. 13 (1) : 103-141.

CARR, D. J . , ed., 1983. — Sydney Parkinson, Artist of Cook's Endeavour Voyage. 300 p., Canberra.
CUZENT, G., 1860. — Iles de la Société. Tahiti. 275 p . , Rochefort.
EXELL, A. W., 1931. — Specimens attributed to Back in the ' Supplementum Plantarum '. Journ. Bot.

         British & For. 69 (825) : 227-230.
FOSBERG, F. R. & SACHET, M.-H., 1983. — Plants of the Society Islands, in CARR, D. J . , ed., Sydney

         Parkinson ... 76-107.
JUEL, H. O., 1924. — Notes on the herbarium of Abraham Back. Svenska Linne-sàllsk. Aarssk. 7 :

         68-82.
MERRILL, E . D., 1917. — An interpretation of Rumphius's Herbarium Amboinense. 595 p., Manila.
MERRILL, E . D., 1954. — The botany of Cook's voyages. Chronica Botanica 14 (5-6) : i-iv, 161-384.
NADEAUD, J . , 1873. — Enumeration des plantes indigènes de l'île de Tahiti, i-v, 1-86, Paris.
PARKINSON, S., 1773. — A journal of a voyage to the South Seas in his Majesty's ship, The Endea-

         vour ... 1-222, London.

POLHILL, R. M. & SOUSA, S. M., 1981. — Robinieae, in POLHILL, R. M. & RAVEN, P. H., Advances in

         legume systematics, Part 1 : 283-288.
SACHET, M.-H., 1983. — Botanique de l'île de Tupai, îles de la Société. Atoll Res. Bull. 276 : 1-26.
ST. JOHN, H. & PHILIPSON, W. R., 1962. — An account of the flora of the Henderson Island, South

         Pacific Ocean. Trans. R. Soc. N. Z. Bot. 1 (14) : 175-194.
SEURAT, L. G., 1904. — Observations sur quelques îles orientales de l'archipel Tuamotu. 1-11, Papeete.
SMITH, A. C , 1978. — A precursor to a new Flora of Fiji. Allertonia 1 (6) : 331-414.
                                           Bull. Mus. natn. Hist, nat., Paris, 4 e sér., 9, 1987,
                                                       section B, Adansonia, n° 1 : 29-38.

        Nouvelles observations sur des Syzygium (Myrtaceae)

                                   des Mascareignes

                                               J. BOSSER, T H . C A D E T | & J . GUÉHO

            Résumé : Révision du complexe Syzygium cymosum (Lam.) DC. — Eugenia platyphylla Cor-
            demoy (Myrtaceae) à La Réunion et du complexe Syzygium glomeratum (Lam.) DC. à Mau-
            rice. Eugenia platyphylla est considéré comme étant une espèce distincte qui a été renommée
            Syzygium cordemoy i Bosser & Cadet. Deux nouvelles espèces : Syzygium coriaceum Bosser &
            Guého et S. petrinense Bosser & Guého ont été distinguées de S. glomeratum, dont la des-
            cription a été amplifiée. En outre, une nouvelle espèce, S. mamillatum Bosser & Guého, de
            Maurice, est décrite.
            Summary : Revision of the complex Syzygium cymosum (Lam.) DC. — Eugenia platyphylla
            Cordemoy in Reunion and of the complex Syzygium glomeratum (Lam.) DC. in Mauritius.
            Eugenia platyphylla is considered to be a distinct species, renamed S. cordemoyi Bosser &
            Cadet. Two new species : S. coriaceum Bosser & Guého and S. petrinense Bosser & Guého
            are separated from S. glomeratum whose description is amplified. Furthermore, a new spe-
            cies, S. mamillatum Bosser & Guého is described.

            Jean Bosser, O.R.S.T.O.M., Laboratoire de Phanerogamic Muséum national d'Histoire
            naturelle, 16, rue Buffon, 75005 Paris, France.
            Thérésien Cadet t , Laboratoire de Biologie Végétale, Université de La Réunion, B.P. 5,
            97490 Ste Clotilde, La Réunion.
            Joseph Guého, Herbarium, M.S.I.R.I., Réduit, Mauritius.

        Depuis la note de A . J . SCOTT (Kew Bull. 3 4 ( 3 ) : 4 7 3 - 4 9 8 , 1 9 7 9 ) sur les Myrtaceae des

Mascareignes, des observations ont pu être faites sur le terrain et des éléments nouveaux ont
permis de faire une interprétation plus précise de complexes qui étaient apparus comme
hétérogènes, celui de Syzygium cymosum (Lam.) D C . — Eugenia platyphylla Cordemoy à la
Réunion, celui de S. glomeratum (Lam.) D C . à Maurice. E n outre une espèce nouvelle, S.
mamillatum, de Maurice, rappelant S. cymosum p a r ses feuilles mais ayant des inflores-
cences et des fleurs très différentes, est décrite.

1. LE COMPLEXE SYZYGIUM CYMOSUM — EUGENIA PLATYPHYLLA.

      Dans sa description de E. platyphylla CORDEMOY note les grandes feuilles presque sessiles,
subcordées à la base. Les caractères qu'il donne de l'inflorescence et des fleurs n'apportent
aucun élément discriminant. Si on se rapporte à son herbier, on trouve un échantillon des
Rampes Le Tort, Plaine des Palmistes qui, bien que l'étiquette ait été en partie rongée par
des insectes, peut être considéré comme le type de son espèce. Cet échantillon comprend un
rameau à grandes feuilles qui correspond bien à la description, 2 rameaux à feuilles plus
                                                              — 30 —

petites et des fragments d'inflorescence portant des boutons floraux. Nous avons analysé un
de ces boutons qui comptait 126 étamines, ce qui est un caractère de S. cymosum. A notre
avis, les feuilles plus petites et les boutons floraux correspondent à S. cymosum. Cependant,
comme CORDEMOY ne donne que les dimensions des grandes feuilles, on est conduit à se
demander si les feuilles plus petites et les éléments d'inflorescence n ' o n t pas été ajoutés
après coup à l'échantillon. Les caractères donnés pour les fleurs ne permettent pas de tran-
cher ce problème. On peut donc considérer soit que E. platyphylla est basé sur du matériel
appartenant en partie à S. cymosum, soit que CORDEMOY a décrit un taxon dont le type, ou
ce qu'il en reste, est représenté seulement par le rameau à grandes feuilles de son herbier.
Quoiqu'il en soit le nom E. platyphylla est illégitime car préalablement déjà utilisé (O.
BERG, 1857).

       Mais y a-t-il vraiment 2 espèces dans ce groupe ? Dans sa note, A. J. SCOTT (op. cit. :
490, 1979) rapporte E. platyphylla à S. cymosum var. cymosum. Il dit que la taille, la
forme et l'épaisseur du limbe foliaire sont très variables et qu'il existe des intermédiaires
entre les formes ce qui le conduit à tout placer dans une seule espèce. Si on examine
l'ensemble du matériel, on trouve des échantillons à grandes feuilles qui se rattachent au
rameau à grandes feuilles du type de CORDEMOY de E. platyphylla. Les limbes sont en
moyenne plus grands que ceux du reste du matériel : 9,5-23 x 4-10 cm contre 3-13 (-21) x
(1,5-) 2-6 (7,5) cm, mais la forme reste sensiblement la même ; ils sont généralement plus
coriaces et le pétiole est court : 2-5 mm à subnul, contre 6-15 mm de longueur pour le reste
du matériel. Ces différences ne suffiraient cependant pas à séparer 2 espèces si elles
n'étaient en relation avec des caractères de la fleur et du fruit. Les échantillons à grandes
feuilles ont des fleurs à 80-100 étamines et des fruits ± ovoïdes, à péricarpe creusé de
petites dépressions ; les autres échantillons à feuilles généralement plus petites et plus lon-
guement pétiolées, ont des fleurs à 120-150 étamines et des fruits plus sphériques, à péri-
carpe lisse. On peut ajouter que sur le terrain la distinction entre les plantes est facile à
faire. Il est donc préférable de distinguer 2 espèces dans ce groupe, et de proposer un nom
nouveau.

      Syzygium cordemoyi Bosser & Cadet, nom. nov. — Pl. 1.

— Eugenia platyphylla CORDEMOY, Flore Réunion : 432 (1895), pro parte, nom. illegit., non E.
    platyphylla O. BERG, in MARTIUS, Fl. Brasiliensis 14 : 234 (1857). Type : La Réunion, Rampes Le
    Tort, Plaine des Palmistes, Cordemoy (holo-, MARS !) (le rameau à grandes feuilles).

     A Syzygio cymoso foliis maioribus (9,5-23 x 4-10 cm), petiolis brevioribus (2-5 mm longis), flori-
bus cum staminibus paucioribus (90-100), fructo cum exocarpio foveolato (haud laeve) differt.

      TYPE : Bosser 21412, Forêt Mourouvin, Brûlé de Ste Rose, La Réunion, 27.10.1972 (holo-, P !).

      S. cordemoyi est le plus souvent un arbuste des fourrés hygrophiles ou de la végétation
préforestière sur coulées de lave récentes, entre 400 et 1000 m d'altitude, plus rarement un
petit arbre en forêt dense.

      On le trouve dans les parties Est et Sud-Est de l'île (région de St Philippe — Ste Rose,
Hauts de Bras Panon et de St André, Rampes Le Tort — Plaine des Palmistes). Il se distin-
gue de 5. cymosum par ses grandes feuilles à pétiole court, par ses fleurs à étamines moins
                                                                              — 31 —

Pl. 1. — Syzygium cordemoyi : 1, rameau feuillu x 2/3 ; 2, inflorescence en boutons x 2 ; 3, fleur, corolle
      tombée x 3/2 ; 4, pétale x 5/2 ; 5, coupe longitudinale du gynécée x 3 ; 6, fruit x 1. (1-5, Bosser 21412 ;
      6, Cadet 3429, en alcool, P).
                                                              — 32 —

nombreuses, par ses fruits ovoïdes, à surface creusée de petites dépressions sur le frais.
L'épiderme de l'hypanthe contient aussi de grosses glandes visibles sur le sec, qui ne
s'observent pas chez S. cymosum. On peut aussi noter que dans la zone où les 2 espèces
cohabitent (l'aire de S. cymosum est plus vaste et recouvre celle de S. cordemoyi), S. cymo-
sum devient un grand arbre ce qui n'est jamais le cas de S. cordemoyi. Il n'y a pas d'inter-
médiaires faisant penser à la variation continue d'une espèce.

       Nous avons préféré choisir une nouvelle appellation pour cette espèce d'abord pour
honorer E. Jacob DE CORDEMOY, auteur de la Flore de l'Ile de la Réunion et parce que
l'adjectif « platyphyllum» appliqué à un Syzygium, n ' a p p o r t e aucun élément significatif.

      MATÉRIEL ÉTUDIÉ : LA RÉUNION : Bernardi 15082, région de St Philippe, 15.1.1975 ; Boivin s.n.,
bois de la Rivière de l'Est, 2.6.1851 ; Bosser 21412, forêt Mourouvin, Brûlé de Ste Rose, 27.10.1972
(type); 21510, Basse Vallée, 8.11.1972; Cadet 3271, forêt Mourouvin, Ste Rose, ait. 400 m,
8.8.1971 ; 3439, Basse Vallée, St Philippe, ait. 900 m, 12.1.1972 ; 3891, forêt de Mourouvin, Ste Rose,
27.10.1972 ; 4527, Basse Vallée, 22.11.1973 ; Cordemoy s.n., Rampes Le Tort, Plaine des Palmistes
(MARS, type de Eugenia platyphylla, pro parte) ; Fournier s.n., Rampes Le Tort, Plaine des Palmistes,
1943 ; Friedmann 713, sentier de Basse Vallée à Mare Longue (St Philippe), 25.11.1970 ; 1880, Grand
Galet, ait. 600 m, 8.1972 ; 1885, hauts de Bois Blanc, ait. 900 m, 8.1972 ; 1985, Basse Vallée, ait.
800 m, 11.1972 ; 2509, Piton Mare d'Arzule, ait. 500 m, 11.9.1974 ; G. de l'Isle 325, Ravine Sèche,
9.7.1875 ; Lorence in MAU 19164, 19165, route nationale n° 3, 8 km sous la Plaine des Palmistes, ait.
600-650 m, 27.2.1979 ; Rivais s.n., hauts de Bras Panon, 8.10.1942.

2. LE COMPLEXE DE S. GLOMERATUM (LAM.) DC. À MAURICE.

       Le type de Eugenia glomerata cité par LAMARCK dans l'Encyclopédie est « Commerson
Isle Bourbon ». Mais in P - L A , l'échantillon déterminé par lui, et qui correspond au proto-
logue, porte « Sonnerat, Isle de France ». Il existe à P , dans l'herbier général, un échantil-
lon manifestement identique à celui de P-LA et qui est étiqueté « Commerson 93, Isle de
France ». In P-JU 13944 on trouve 3 feuilles dont une porte un rameau stérile qui corres-
pond bien aussi au type de P-LA et qui est mentionné « Commerson, Isle de France » (les 2
autres feuilles comme le note A . J. SCOTT, op. cit. : 492 (1979), appartiennent à 5. cymo-
sum). Il s'agit donc très vraisemblablement d'une même récolte de COMMERSON faite à l'Isle
de France. Le type de LAMARCK et l'isotype de P ne portent que des inflorescences galleuses
et quelques rares fleurs dont tous les pétales et toutes les étamines sont tombés. Les fleurs,
pas plus que les fruits, n'étaient donc connus, ce qui rendait difficile la conpréhension de
cette espèce. Notre démarche a consisté à rechercher dans le matériel moderne, en nous
basant sur les caractères de la feuille, les seuls sûrs, des échantillons concordant bien avec le
type. Guého & Lecordier in MAU 17846 et Bosser 22632 in P , tous deux en fleurs, ont été
retenus. Les caractères de S. glomeratum ont alors pu être précisés. L'analyse du matériel
rapporté à cette espèce a alors permis de séparer deux nouvelles espèces : S. coriaceum et S.
petrinense basées essentiellement sur des caractères de la feuille : nervation, texture, et de la
fleur : nombre des étamines. Il nous est apparu aussi que S. vaughanii Guého & Scott avait
des affinités avec S. glomeratum. Les feuilles sont cependant plus grandes et de forme un
peu différente, les fleurs paraissent plus petites, et nous avons pensé qu'il était préférable de
maintenir cette espèce en attendant d'autres informations. Il est évident que tout ce groupe
doit encore être étudié sur le terrain. Nous savons trop peu de choses sur la variation de la
                                                                               — 33 —

Pl. 2. — Syzygium glomeratum : 1, rameau fleuri x 2/3 ; 2, fleur, corolle tombée x 6 ; 3, pétale x 7 ; 4, frag-
      ment de feuille, face inférieure, très grossi. — S. pelrinen.se : 5, rameau fleuri x 2/3 ; 6, fleur, corolle tom-
      bée x 8 ; 7, pétale x 8 ; 8, fruit x 5/2 ; 9, fragment de feuille, face inférieure, très grossi. (1-4, Guého &
     Lecordier in MAU 17846 ; 5-7, 9, Guého & Lecordier 19566, P ; 8, Friedmann 1180, P).
                                                             — 34 —

taille et de la forme des feuilles, sur les inflorescences et les fruits. Il est possible que des
hybrides existent entre ces espèces ou avec des espèces comme S. scandens (Baker) Guého &
Scott qui habitent les mêmes zones.

       Syzygium glomeratum (Lam.) DC. (diagn. ampl.). — P l . 2.

      Frutex vel arbor ad 10 m altus ; folia chartacea, ovalia vel elliptica, (2-) 3-8 x (1,2-) 1,8-4,2 cm,
apice rotundata, obtusa vel subacuminata, basin versus cuneiformia, marginibus paullo revolutis, reti-
culo nervorum ordinis tertiae haud prominente ; petiolus 2-7 mm longus ; inflorescentiae terminales,
multiflorae, paniculatae, 2-7 cm longae ; gemmae florum claviformes, 3-4 mm longae ; flores tetra-
meri, hypanthium ad ± 1 mm liberum ; sepala triangularia, obtusa, ad 0,5-1 mm longa ; petala subor-
bicularia, 2 x 2-3 mm ; stamina 30-40 ; antherae oblongae, 0,3-0,4 mm longae ; filamenta 1,5-2 mm
longa ; ovarium biloculare, cum 5-10 ovulis in quoque loculo ; stylus ± 1 mm longus.

      TYPE : « Sonnerai » (vraisemblablement plutôt « Commerson »), Isle de France (holo-, P-LA ;
iso-, P, P-JU 13944 pro parte).

      MATÉRIEL ÉTUDIÉ : ILE MAURICE : Bosser 22632, Bassin Blanc, 24.4.1982; Bouton 616, s. loc. ;
Commerson (« Sonnerat »), Isle de France (type) ; Guého & Lecordier in MAU 17846, path from Les
Mares to Bassin Blanc, 17.2.1976 ; Lorence 2617, in MAU 19344, Pétrin, 9.5.1979 ; Vaughan 1100,
Mare aux Vacoas, 8.3.1935 ; 1331, Macabé transect.

       Syzygium coriaceum Bosser & G u é h o , sp. nov. — Pl. 3.

      Frutex ad 1-1,5 m altus vel arbor parva ad 7 m alta ; folia crasse coriacea, obovalia vel late ellip-
tica, 1,5-6,5 x 1-4 cm, apice rotundata vel leviter emarginata, basi cuneiformia vel rotundata, margi-
nibus valde revolutis, reticulo nervorum utrinque valde prominente ; petiolus 1-2 mm longus ; inflores-
centiae pauci- vel multiflorae, terminales vel axillares, 1,5-3 cm longae ; flores tetrameri ; gemmae flo-
rum obconicae vel ± claviformes, 2,5-4 mm longae ; sepala rotundata vel obtusa, 0,5 mm longa ;
petala late ovalia vel orbicularia, 1,2-1,5 x 1,5-1,7 mm ; stamina 18-28 ; ovula 4-5 in quoque loculo ;
fructus globosus, 0,6-1,2 (-1,5) cm in diametro, cum 1-2 seminibus.

      TYPE : Lorence 2375 (in MAU 19312), Pétrin Nature Reserve, ait. 630 m, île Maurice, 10.2.1979
(holo-, P ! ; iso-, MAU !).

       Espèce endémique de l'île Maurice, variable suivant la station : arbrisseau sur des sols
ferrallitiques pauvres (Pétrin), petit arbre sur des sols plus profonds (Macabé). Les ramilles
sont tétragones, grisâtres, les feuilles très coriaces à bords finalement fortement révolutés ;
la nervation est, sur le sec, fortement saillante sur les 2 faces et les nervilles sont à mailles
relativement lâches (par rapport à l'espèce suivante, S. petrinense). L'espèce se distingue
surtout par ses fleurs à étamines peu nombreuses (18-28) et ses feuilles très coriaces. Les
fruits sont globuleux, de 0,6-1,2 (1,5) cm de diamètre, devenant pourpre noir à maturité.

       On la trouve dans les forêts humides des terres hautes et les brousses éricoïdes à Philip-
pia et Phylica. Floraison en janvier-février.

      MATÉRIEL ÉTUDIÉ : ILE MAURICE : Boivin s.n., bois des parties élevées du Pouce, sept. 1849 ; Bos-
ser 22628, Pétrin, 24.4.1982; Bouton 615, Mare aux Vacoas; Coode 4714, Piton Grand Bassin,
31.1.1975 ; 4872, Macabé, 15.2.1975 ; Friedmann s.n., Pétrin, janv. 1984 (en alcool) ; Guého in MAU
16509, Piton du Fouge, 26.10.1974 ; in MAU 17103, Pétrin, 22.5.1975 ; Guého, Bosser & Lecordier in
Pl. 3. — Syzygium coriaceum : 1, rameau en fruit x 2/3 ; 2, bouton floral x 8 ; 3, fleur, corolle tombée x 6 ;
      4, un pétale x 9 ; 5, coupe longitudinale du gynécée x 9 ; 6, fruit x 3 ; 7, détail du limbe foliaire, face
     inférieure. (1, 6, 7, Bosser 22628; 2-5, Friedmann s.n., en alcool, P).
                                                             — 36 —

MAU 19544, Gaulettes Serrées, près de Camp Thorel, ait. 500 m, 11.3.1980 ; Lorence 164, Pétrin, ait.
630 m, 14.7.1973; 1200 (in MAU 15248), Pétrin, 5.7.1972; 2375, Pétrin, ait. 630 m, 10.2.1979
(type) ; Vaughan in MAU 10334, près de Brise Fer, 21.4.1962 ; in MAU 15248, Pétrin, 5.7.1972 ;
1780, Macabé.

       Syzygium petrinense Bosser & Guého, sp. nov. — Pl. 2.

      A Syzygio glomerato foliis coriaceis cum reticulo denso nervorum ordinis tertiae subtus valde pro-
minente et floribus cum 50-80 staminibus differt.

      TYPE : Guého & Lecordier in MAU 19566, Pétrin Nature Reserve, île Maurice, 30.4.1980 (holo-,
P ! ; iso-, K, MAU, REU, GEN).

       Arbrisseau haut de 1-2 m à petit arbre à branches étalées, atteignant 5 m de hauteur.
Ramilles aplaties à ± tétragones, brun clair à grisâtres. Feuilles coriaces ; limbe elliptique à
subcirculaire, 2-7 x 1,5-5,4 cm, arrondi et parfois un peu échancré au sommet, plus rare-
ment à apicule court et obtus, arrondi ou cunéiforme à la base ; face supérieure lisse, face
inférieure à réseau de nervilles très dense et fortement en relief ; marges non révolutées ou à
peine infléchies ; pétiole épais, long de 2-5 mm. Inflorescences en thyrses terminaux et aux
aisselles des feuilles supérieures, formant souvent un ensemble complexe paniculiforme.
Fleurs par 2-3 au sommet des rameaux, 4-mères. Boutons floraux obconiques ou un peu
claviformes, longs de 4-5 m m . Hypanthe à partie libre de 1,5-2 m m . Lobes sépalaires arron-
dis, hauts de ± 1 mm. Pétales subcirculaires à largement ovales, 2,5-3 x 2-2,5 mm. Éta-
mines 50-80. Ovules 5-10 (-13) par loge. Fruit sphérique, un peu étranglé au sommet, de
 10-12 m m de diamètre. Graine 1, à cotylédons blanc verdâtre sur le frais.

       Espèce endémique de l'île Maurice, assez commune en station marécageuse dans la
région de Pétrin, Plaine Champagne. Se distinguant bien des espèces voisines (S. glomera-
tum et S. coriaceum) par ses feuilles lisses sur la face supérieure et à nervilles densément
réticulées et saillantes sur la face inférieure et par ses fleurs à étamines plus nombreuses.
Floraison février à avril ; fruits en août-septembre.

       MATÉRIEL ÉTUDIÉ : ILE MAURICE : Bosser 22625 et 22627, Pétrin, 24.4.1982 ; Capuron 28265 SF,
Est de la forêt de Macabé, 13.2.1968 ; Coode 4432, Rivière du Poste, entre Pétrin et Grand Bassin,
 12.3.1974 ; Friedmann 1180, Plaine Champagne, mai 1971 ; Guého in MAU 17100, Pétrin, 22.5.1975 ;
in MAU 19564, Pétrin, 30.4.1980 ; m MAU 19603, Plaine Champagne, 22.8.1980 ; Guého & Lecordier
in MAU 19566, Pétrin, 30.4.1980 (type) ; Lorence 109, Plaine Champagne, 17.3.1973 ; 1209 (in MAU
 17050), Pétrin, 19.4.1975 ; Vaughan 636, 660, 661, s. l o c , 6.3.1930 ; 1782, 1791, Rivière du Poste.

 3. U N E N O U V E L L E E S P È C E D E SYZYGIUM DE L ' I L E M A U R I C E .

       Syzygium mamillatum Bosser & G u é h o , sp. nov. — Pl. 4.

       Frutex cauliflorus 3-4 m altus ; folia chartacea, elliptica vel oblonga, 7-13 x 1,8-6 cm, acuminata,
 basi cuneiformis ; petiolus 5-13 mm longus ; inflorescentiae uniflorae, 2-40 in protuberationibus ligno-
 sis quasi mamilliformibus basi truhci fruticis institutae ; pedunculi a bracteis imbricatis tecti, ± 1 mm
 longi ; flores tetrameri; gemmae florum obconicae, 5-6 x 3-4 mm; hypanthium 8-10 mm longum,
Pl. 4. — Syzygium mamillatum : 1, rameau x 2/3 ; 2, fleur, corolle tombée x 2 ; 3, un pétale x 5 ; 4, jeunes
      fruits x 2 ; 5, coupe longitudinale du gynécée x 2 ; 6, détail du limbe foliaire, face inférieure. (1-3, 6,
      Guého & Lecordier in MAU 18963 ; 4, 5, Friedmann s.n., en alcool, P).
                                                              — 38 —

ovarium ad 3-4 mm excedens ; sepala semiorbicularia, 2x3 mm ; petala orbicularia, 4 mm in diame-
tro, caduca ; stamina 80-90 ; filamenta 10-18 mm longa ; antherae 0,8-1 mm longae ; ovarium bilocu-
lare, cum 15-20 ovulis.

      TYPE : Guého & Lecordier in MAU 18963, forêt de Macabé, île Maurice, 18.10.1978 (holo-,
MAU !).

      Arbuste cauliflore, ayant à la base du tronc de nombreux renflements ligneux sur les-
quels sont groupées de nombreuses (2-40) inflorescences uniflores, à pédoncules couverts de
petites bractées triangulaires, imbriquées, ± charnues. Boutons floraux obconiques, rose
pâle avant l'anthèse, portant parfois au 1/3 inférieur 2 bractéoles opposées, écailleuses.
Hypanthe rose violacé, long de 8-10 mm et libre sur 3-4 m m , à surface glanduleuse, granu-
leuse. Pétales roses, semi-circulaires, concaves, caducs, d'environ 4 mm de diamètre. Étami-
nes 80-90, à filets inégaux longs de 10-18 mm, aplatis, rose pâle à la base, blancs au som-
met ; anthères ellipsoïdes, crème, longues de 0,8-1 mm. Fruit vu seulement jeune, verdâtre-
rosé à ± rougeâtre, couronné par les sépales verts. Graines 4.

       Espèce endémique de l'île Maurice, très caractéristique par ses inflorescences et ses
fleurs à pédoncules couverts de bractéoles. Les feuilles cartacées, elliptiques à oblongues,
ressemblent un peu à celles de S. cymosum. Elle est connue seulement de la forêt de
Macabé et de ses environs. Floraison en octobre.

       MATÉRIEL ÉTUDIÉ : ILE MAURICE : Bosser 22570, forêt de Macabé, 8 . 3 . 1 9 8 0 ; Friedmann s.n.,
forêt de Macabé, janv. 1984 (en alcool) ; Guého & Lecordier in MAU 18963, forêt de Macabé,
18.10.1968 (type) ; Guého in MAU 19602, Brise Fer, 2 5 . 8 . 1 9 8 0 ; in MAU 20564, forêt de Macabé,
22.2.1983.

      REMERCIEMENTS : Les auteurs remercient le Dr H . HEINE (Laboratoire de Phanérogamie, Muséum,
Paris) qui a traduit les diagnoses latines.

                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHIE

BAKER, J . G., 1877. — Flora of Mauritius and the Seychelles, Myrtaceae : 111-119.
CORDEMOY, E. J . , 1985. — Flore de l'Ile de La Réunion, Myrtacées : 423-433.
LAMARCK, J . B. A. P., 1789. — Encycl. Method. Bot. 3 : 199.
SCOTT, A. J . , 1979. — Notes on Myrtaceae in the Mascarenes with some recombinations for taxa from

         Aldabra, Mp'aya, New Caledonia. Kew Bull. 3 4 ( 3 ) : 473-498.
                                             Bull. Mus. natn. Hist, nat., Paris, 4e sér., 9, 1987,
                                                        section B, Adansonia, n° 1 : 39-42.

        Une nouvelle espèce de Polycarpaea (Caryophyllaceae)

                                  d'Afrique tropicale

                                             J . - P . LEBRUN, A . L . STORK & J. WÙEST

             Résumé : Une nouvelle espèce, Polycarpaea rupicola Lebrun & Stork, est décrite du Came-
             roun où elle pousse entre blocs et rochers dans ou au bord de rivières. C'est une plante
             vivace qui ressemble au P. poggei Pax dont elle se distingue par les caractères suivants : tiges
             et feuilles entièrement glabres ; feuilles oblancéolées, obtuses ; stipules et sépales plus petits ;
             ces derniers sans ligne médiane (ils sont ± carénés chez P. poggei) ; pétales oblongs.
             Summary : Polycarpaea rupicola Lebrun & Stork, a new species from Cameroon where it
             grows between stones and rocks in and near streams, is described. This perennial species is
             similar to P. poggei Pax but differs in the following characters : stems and leaves completely
             glabrous ; oblanceolate, obtuse leaves ; smaller size of stipules and sepals ; the latter without
             a middle longitudinal marking (in P. poggei ± keeled) ; oblong petals.

             Jean-Pierre Lebrun, Institut d'Élevage et de Médecine Vétérinaire des Pays Tropicaux, 10,
             rue Pierre Curie, 94704 Maisons Alfort Cedex, France.
            Adélaïde L. Stork et Jean Wuest, Conservatoire et Jardin botaniques de la Ville de Genève,
             Case postale 60, 1292 Chambésy (GE), Suisse.

       Le hasard a voulu par deux fois déjà que nous eussions à décrire une nouvelle espèce
de Polycarpaea (Adansonia, sér. 2, 10 : 135, 1970 ; ibid., 16 : 461, 1977).

       Aujourd'hui, c'est encore d'un membre de ce genre décidément captivant, que nous
présentons ci-dessous la description. A notre connaissance cela porte à dix-sept le nombre
d'espèces de Polycarpaea présentes en Afrique tropicale.

       Polycarpaea rupicola Lebrun & Stork, sp. nov.

      Herba perennis 20 cm alta radice polari ; caulibus erectis-arcuatis glabris ; foliis oppositis ve/
interdum pseudoverticillatis (per 4-6), uninervibus, 10-15 mm longis 1-2,8 latis, oblanceolatis, obtusis,
infra nervo medio prominente rufo praeditis ; stipulis ovatis, acuminatis, 1-2 mm longis, scariosis,
fimbriatis-ciliatis ; floribus in cymas corymbosas, 9-12-floras dispositis ; sepalis 5 lanceolatis, acutis,
argenteo-albis, ca. 2,3 mm longis 0,8 mm latis, sparsim ciliatis, basi cupreo-tinctis ; petalis 5 oblongis
ca. 1 mm longis, maculis rufis praeditis, supra scariosis translucidis, apice denticulato-crispato ; stami-
nibus 5 quorum filamentum anthera duplo longius est ; capsula ovoidea ca. 1,5 mm longa valvis 3 in
medio brunneis margine flavidis dehiscenti ; seminibus reniformibus 0,8-0,9 mm longis ; testa irregula-
riter reticulata, flavida lucida maculis rufis ornata.

      P. poggei similis sed differt : caulis foliisque glabris ; foliis oblanceolatis, stipulis sepalisque parvi-
bus ; petalis oblongis ; linea media sepalis deficiente.

      Habitat in rupibus Africae tropicae.
                                                             — 40 —
      TYPUS : Letouzey 9792 (3.1.1970, fl., fr.), Cameroun, bordure de la Sanaga en amont (rive gau-
che) du pont dit de Kikot (route Douala—Bafia), 70 km SSW de Bafia (feuille IGN 1/200 000e
Bafia) ; entre blocs et rochers gnéissiques après décrue du fleuve (holo-, P ; iso-, ALF).
      Plante vivace d'environ 20 cm de hauteur, glabre (Pl. 1). Racine pivotante d'abord simple
puis divisée. Rameaux fascicules au sommet de la racine principale, brun-rougeâtre, arqués-
dressés ; tiges plus jeunes vertes et pratiquement seules à porter des feuilles planes, aux

Pl. i. — Polycarpaea rupicola : A, partie d'une plante ; B, détail de la tige portant une paire de feuilles avec
      stipules. (D'après Letouzey 9792 et 11156).
                                                              — 41 —

Pl. 2. — Polycarpaea rupicola (photographies au MEB) : a, partie d'une fleur montrant sépale, pétale et étamine
       x 18 ; b, détail d'un sépale (vers la base) à bords ciliés x 200 ; c, détail d'une bractée à bords ciliés x 250 ;
      d, fruit mûr ; seules deux valves sont montrées ; leurs bords (de couleur jaune) forment comme une bande
      marginale x 38 ; e et f, graines dans deux positions x 80.

bords hyalins, uninervées, opposées par deux ou parfois subfasciculées par 4 à 6. Feuilles
d'environ 10-15 m m de longueur, larges de 1-2,8 m m , oblancéolées, obtuses au sommet, de
teinte glauque au-dessus et rouge sur leur nervure médiane au-dessous, du moins sur le
frais. Stipules d'environ 1,2-2 m m de longueur, scarieuses-translucides, fimbriées-ciliées à la
base et aux bords, terminées en pointe effilée (souvent déchirée en deux). Les jeunes tiges
vertes, naissant d'une tige ancienne brune, portent des inflorescences terminales formées
de cymes corymbiformes bien distinctes, moyennement denses, chacune riche de 9-12 fleurs
environ, et mesurant une dizaine de millimètres étalés sur le sec, parfois un peu effuse et
atteignant alors 17 m m de longueur ; pédicelle floral épais, un peu en forme de cône ren-
versé. Fleurs à 5 sépales lancéolés, blanc d'argent, peu brillants à la lumière du jour, trans-
                                                              — 42 —

lucides et sans ligne médiane, longs d'environ 2,3 mm, larges de 0,8 mm, munis à leur base
de quelques stries rouge-brunâtre, aux bords un peu ciliés (Pl. 2). Cinq pétales oblongs,
piquetés sur 3/4 de la longueur de brun-rouille sur le sec (rose sur le frais), longs d'environ
1 mm et larges d'à peu près 0,3 mm. Cinq étamines alterni-pétales d'environ 0,7 mm de lon-
gueur, à anthères oblongues (jaunes sur le frais), égalant la moitié du filet. Capsule ovoïdale,
longue d'environ 1,5 m m , s'ouvrant en trois valves vers l'extérieur, tachetée de brun-
rougeâtre dans leur partie médiane, en creux par rapport aux bords épaissis, qui sont jaunes
et moins larges. Graines reniformes, longues de 0,8-0,9 mm ; surface du tégument irréguliè-
rement réticulée, d'un jaune luisant et ornée de stries ou petites taches rouge-brunâtre (Pl. 2).

      AUTRES ÉCHANTILLONS ÉTUDIÉS : Letouzey 11156 (7.2.1972, fl., fr.), Cameroun, cours du Nkam
près Sahé, 3 km SSW de Nkondjok sur la route Bafang-Yabassi (feuille IGN 1/200 000e Ndikiniméki),
dans les fentes de rochers baignés par l'eau lors des crues (P) ; Hepper 1926 (11.2.1958, fl., fr.),
Cameroun occidental, river Katsina (= Kimbi) Bridge, in rock crevices beside river, ait. 1070 m (P) ;
J. Lowe 3485 (12.2.1978, fl., fr.), Cameroun, beside river Sanaga Bridge near Nkong Ngok (4°10' N-
11°01' E), ca. 300 m, among rock beside river (K).

      L'espèce décrite ci-dessus ressemble par sa souche vivace au Polycarpaea poggei Pax
connu du Zaïre et d'Angola. Elle en diffère toutefois par l'absence de toute pilosité (sauf
les cils bordant les stipules et les sépales (voir Pl. 2), l'habitus (rameaux bien plus grêles,
partiellement flexueux), le manque d'une ligne médiane sur les bractées, les feuilles oblan-
céolées et obtuses, les pétales non acuminés au sommet, les dimensions plus modestes des
stipules et sépales ; par son écologie enfin : fentes de rochers. Les stipules fimbriées-ciliées
et la capsule à bandes longitudinales pourraient indiquer une certaine parentée, comme avec
P. corymbosa (L.) L a m .

      REMERCIEMENTS : Une fois encore nous adressons nos bien sincères remerciements à notre collègue
et ami le Dr H. HEINE du Muséum (P) et à Madame I. DE ZBOROWSKI ( A L F ) pour leur aimable et
précieuse collaboration.
Bull. Mus. natn. Hist, nat., Paris, 4 e sér., 9, 1987,
           section B, Adansonia, n° 1 : 43-80.

Revision of the genus Tachiadenus                                (Gentianaceae)

                                                 J. KLACKENBERG

Summary : The Madagascan endemic genus Tachiadenus is revised. 11 species and one sub-
species are recognized. Three new species are presented, of which one, T. umbellatus Klack.
is described here, and two, T. pervillei Humbert ex Klack. and T. boivinii Humbert ex Klack.
are validated here. One new combination is also made, T. platypterus Humbert subsp.
angustialatus (Humbert) Klack. Various aspects of the morphology are discussed including
micromorphology of the seeds as seen by means of SEM. A key to all species as well as
their typification, maps and drawings are given. A hypothesis of the cladistic relationship of
the species is presented. Phytogeography and vicariance patterns are discussed.

Résumé : Révision de Tachiadenus, genre endémique de Madagascar ; 11 espèces et une sous-
espèce sont reconnues. Trois nouvelles espèces sont présentées, dont une, T. umbellatus
Klack., est décrite et deux, T. pervillei Humbert ex Klack. et T. boivinii Humbert ex Klack.,
sont validées ici. Une nouvelle combinaison, T. platypterus Humbert subsp. angustialatus
(Humbert) Klack., est établie. Des aspects différents de la morphologie sont discutés, incluant
la micro-morphologie des graines au microscope électronique à balayage. Une clé de détermi-
nation est proposée ; tous les taxa sont typifies, illustrés et localisés. Une hypothèse de l'affi-
nité cladistique des espèces est présentée. La phytogéographie et des types de vicariance sont
discutés.

Jens Klackenberg, Botaniska institutionen, Stockholms universitet, S-106 91 Stockholm,
Suède.

                                                        INTRODUCTION

       Tachiadenus is a homogeneous, rather small genus of 1 1 species endemic t o Madagas-
car. The generic name was introduced by GRISEBACH (1839) in his Genera et Species Gen-
tianearum, a fundamental work for the systematics of Gentianaceae. GRISEBACH placed his
genus in the tribe Lisiantheae (« Lisyantheae »), b u t it was later transferred t o the tribe

Exaceae (characterized i.a. by a bilocular ovary) by BENTHAM & H O O K E R ( 1 8 7 6 ) . It was

put in the subtribe Tachiinae by GILG ( 1 8 9 5 ) , i.e. near the original position given to it by
GRISEBACH. However, in spite of its unilocular ovary with parietal placentation, Tachiade-
nus is probably best returned t o Exaceae sharing several characters with the genera in this
tribe (for a further discussion see KLACKENBERG, 1 9 8 5 : 1 7 ) .

      When introducing Tachiadenus GRISEBACH transferred three species of Lisianthus, L.
carinatus, L. trinervis a n d L. tubiflorus, to his new genus, a n d also added one new species,
T. longiflorus, c o m m o n on the central plateau. T h e widely distributed T. carinatus, the
first of the species to be described in 1 7 9 2 by DESROUSSEAUX, a n d also T. tubiflorus and
T. longiflorus, are still considered to belong to the genus. T. trinervis, however, is n o w
                                                              — 44 —

placed in the recently described genus Ornichia (KLACKENBERG, 1986). Three species were
added during the 19th century. It was not until 1963 that the remaining taxa, T. vohima-
vensis, T. platypterus var. angustialatus, T. pervillei, T. boivinii and T. antaisaka, were des­
cribed by HUMBERT in a preliminary paper when preparing the family Gentianaceae for the
Flore de Madagascar et des Comores (not completed). All of the latter taxa are accepted
in the present revision, but T. platypterus var. angustialatus is elevated to the rank of sub­
species and T. pervillei and T. boivinii, not validly published by HUMBERT, are here vali­
dated. T. umbellatus is a new species described in the present paper.

      Material has been examined from BM, K, MO, P and S (abbreviations according to HOLMGREN et
al., 1981). Measurements in the descriptions are from dry material.

      The spelling of geographical names is as much as possible in accordance with the Carte de Mada­
gascar au 1 : 500000 Type 1963, Institut Géographique National, Paris, annexe Tananarive.

      All drawings are by the author.

       The taxa delimited in this work are in accordance with the discussion in KLACKENBERG
(1985 : 9), i.e. in brief : 1) species are morphologically identifiable distinct populations ; 2)
subspecies are two or several identifiable populations with intermediate forms in a conti­
guous area ; 3) varieties are locale deviating populations of a species ; 4) forms are devia­
ting individuals. Varieties and forms are considered to be of no value in this work.

       Tachiadenus is small and homogeneous and a division into sections of the genus is not
thought necessary. Furthermore, to avoid paraphyletic groups T. gracilis would have to be
the sole representative in its section, in any delimitation, which will be neither practical nor
meaningful.

                                                         MORPHOLOGY

       HABIT : The genus Tachiadenus consists of erect annual herbs with woody base to pro­
bably perennial subshrubs, from ca. 0.1 m (several species) to 3 m high (T. tubiflorus).

       STEM : The stems are terete to subquadrangular. They are sometimes wingless (T.
tubiflorus) but usually furnished with four wings or lines. The wings or lines are either
situated at equal distance from each other or run more closely to each other in two pairs at
opposite sides of the stem (T. platypterus, T. longiflorus, T. pervillei and T. boivinii). In
T. vohimavensis the lines are also situated in two pairs at opposite sides of the stem, but
below the attachments of the leaves, not between them, which is the usual state.

      LEAVES : The leaves follow the usual pattern of the Gentianaceae. They are always
decussate. The leaf pairs are usually separated by more or less elongated internodes, but
when the inflorescence is umbel-shaped, two pairs of leaves might be very closely set just
below the umbel (i.e. very short internode). The leaves are sometimes furnished with a dis­
tinct petiole (T. longifolius and T. tubiflorus). However, the petiole is usually indistinct or
the leaves are sessile. Distinctly amplexicaul leaves are characteristic only to T. antaisaka,
but semiamplexicaul leaves are found in T. platypterus, T. longiflorus and T. pervillei.
The leaves are always simple and entire. The outline of the leaves is usually narrowly ellip-
                                                                             — 45 —

tic to narrowly ovate but ovate and obovate leaves may be found. They are parallel-nerved
with a prominent mid-nerve and 1-2 pairs of lateral nerves. The leaves are glabrous but
small unicellular hair-like structures are present at the axils. The stomata are anisocytic.

       INFLORESCENCE : The basic structure of the inflorescence is a di- to monochasial
cyme. In five species, viz. T. boivinii, T. antaisaka, T. umbellatus, T. longifolius and T.
tubiflorus the internodes of the inflorescence are shortened. In the latter four species this
results in an almost total suppression of the internodes as well as the leaves (bracts) of the
inflorescence, which manifests itself as an umbel-shaped inflorescence. This same evolution
can also be observed within the Malagasy population of Exacum (KLACKENBERG, 1 9 8 5 : 1 1 ) .

       CALYX : The calyx usually consists of five equal-sized and elongated valvate lobes coa-
lescent 1 / 3 - 1 / 2 of their length and furnished with a wing at the dorsal side of each sepal.
Some exceptions occur. T. tubiflorus has broad and overlapping calyx lobes of different
size with two narrower outer and three broader inner ones forming a many-layered cornet.
T. gracilis and T. tubiflorus have long free lobes and the sepals are coalescent only at the
very base less than 1 / 5 of their length. In T. platypterus subsp. platypterus the sepals are
coalescent 2 / 3 - 3 / 4 of their length with the free lobes turning outwards. These lobes are
furthermore not subulate or linear but broadened in their middle part. T. pervillei is also
furnished with broad sepal lobes though more elongated and less distinctly broadened at the
middle than in T. platypterus subsp. platypterus. The dorsal wings in T. vohimavensis, T.
longiflorus and T. pervillei are usually very distinct (up to 6 m m wide). On the contrary
T. boivinii and T. tubiflorus lack wings completely. The wings of T. carinatus and T.
vohimavensis are characteristic in being broad almost to the tip of the lobes and there
rather abruptly narrowing. The calyx in T. longiflorus is unique in being furnished with 1 0
wings, i.e. except for the wings situated at each sepal along the mid-nerve, there are five
more situated along the sutures between the sepals. These wings end at the lobe sinuses.
The calyx of T. antaisaka is dotted with small epidermal papillae.

       COROLLA : The flowers of Tachiadenus are pentamerous, showy, white to violet and
large with a long narrow tube which varies from a few centimetres long in T. gracilis to up
to 1 9 cm in some individuals of T. boivinii. Above the anthers all species, except T. graci­
lis, T. antaisaka and T. umbellatus and some individuals of T. carinatus, are furnished with
a coronula within the tube. This coronula usually consists only of more or less prominent
knobs immediately above the anthers or between the anthers and the mouth of the tube.
In T. longifolius and T. tubiflorus, however, the coronula forms a coherent callus at the
mouth. The latter species is also furnished with papillate hairs at the base of the petal
lobes around the mouth of the tube.

      The upper epidermis of the petals consists of conical more or less isodiametric cells
covered with cuticular striations.

      After anthesis the nerves in the petals harden and the corolla persists for a long time,
but is eventually thrown off, usually torn apart just above the capsule. In T. longifolius
and T. tubiflorus the corolla is also ultimately deciduous, but first the lower 1 / 4 - 1 / 3 of the
tube distinctly harden and widens forming a hard tube around the young fruit. When the
capsule matures the whole of this tube is rejected.
                                                                              — 46 —

       ANDROECIUM : The corolla tube, slightly widened where the stamens are contained
below the limb, totally encloses the anthers. The anthers are inserted below the lobe sinuses
on very short filaments. They are thin with soft walls. The endothecium walls consist of
more or less parallel bars and the thecae open by longitudinal slits. This is in accordance
with Ornichia and Sebaea but contrary to the hard anthers with finely perforated endothe­
cium found in Exacum which open by apical pores (KLACKENBERG, 1 9 8 5 : 1 5 ) . The anthers
are furnished with a small usually thin apical appendix. This appendix is truely apical as a
continuation of the connective and not placed as a dorsal k n o b as in Exacum. In T. tubi­
florus the appendix is broad with large papillae and in addition the same type of appendices
are found at the bases of the thecae. Furthermore, the anthers are usually rectangular-
linear standing together forming a tube, but the anthers of T. tubiflorus are broader at the
base than at the apex and consequently form a cone.

       GYNOECIUM : The ovary has parietal placentation but at least when young the placentas,
which are long and running from top to base, stand together though not fused forming a
partition. The ovary in this way appears to be bilocular. The placentas are covered with
numerous ovules. The fruit is a bivalved capsule. The partition composed of the protru­
ding mid-walls is in fruit partly to usually entirely coriaceous. In T. tubiflorus not only
the mid-walls but also the involute placentas harden in fruit. The style is filiform and
straight and at late anthesis usually protruding from the tube. The stigma is entire to
faintly bilobed without any taxonomical value.

       SEEDS : The seeds are numerous and small, 0.3-0.8 mm in diameter, usually angular
and subconical with the testa cells anticlinally undulated in a star-shaped pattern ( P I . 1,
B). This is the same seed morphology as is found in most of the genera within the Exaci-
nae, e.g. Ornichia, Exochaenium, Belmontia and most of the species of Exacum (the primi­
tive state within this genus). In T. tubiflorus the seeds are spherical, with the walls of the
testa cells much protruding ( P I . 1, A). This type of seed has not been found in any other
species of Exacinae.

       N o studies have been made on the karyology or the embryology of Tachiadenus.

                                                           PHYLOGENY

       The phylogeny has been worked out by constructing a cladogram (PI. 2) using HENNIG'S
(1966) argumentation method.

       NODE A : The apomorphic characters within Tachiadenus have been identified using
Ornichia as outgroup. Tachiadenus was placed in the subtribe Tachiinae by GILG ( 1 8 9 5 )
but both Tachiadenus and Ornichia are probably better placed in the subtribe Exacinae
(KLACKENBERG, 1 9 8 5 : 17, 1986). Other possible taxa to use as outgroup in relation to
Tachiadenus are Exacum and Sebaea, both in subtribe Exacinae (GILG, 1 8 9 5 ) ; see KLAC­
KENBERG ( 1 9 8 5 : 1 9 ) for a further discussion. Sebaea is a somewhat polymorphic genus
with unclear genus delimitation, often including Exochaenium and Belmontia (see MARAIS,
1 9 6 1 : 4 6 4 ) . Ornichia, Tachiadenus and Exacum are characterized by character (ch.) 2 5
PI. 1. — Seeds of Tachiadenus (SEM) : A, rounded large seeds with protruding star-shaped testa cells, T. tubiflo­
      rus (s. coll., SF-2378, P) ; B, cubical seeds with rather flat star-shaped testa cells, T. gracilis (J. & M. Peltier
      4624, P). — Scale : 200 ^m.

(petals with more or less rounded and convex epidermal cells) and ch. 38 (testa cells star-
shaped) which is not found in several examined Gentianaceae, e.g. Chironia which is chosen
as outgroup for these two characters. Ornichia is chosen as outgroup to Tachiadenus in
the present analysis because it is a much smaller genus than Exacum and therefore easier to
work with. There would be no contradictions to the here presented cladogram when using
Exacum as the outgroup. One difference, however, would be that node D would not exist,
as having calyx wings is considered primitive in Exacum.

      N O D E B : Tachiadenus possesses several unique characters, e.g. ch. 1 9 (long tube),
ch. 30 (narrow capsules) and ch. 33 (ovary pseudo-bilocular), which are found in all spe­
cies. Ch. 12 (calyx lobes not overlapping at base) and ch. 34 (protruding mid-walls in cap­
sule entirely coriaceous) are also considered being apomorphies for Tachiadenus but are not
found in all species and a reversion to the plesiomorphic state found in Ornichia must be
postulated in T. carinatus, T. antaisaka, T. umbellatus and T. longifolius, respectively.
These five characters are polarized likewise as apomorphies using Exacum as outgroup.

      N O D E C : As can be seen from the cladogram Tachiadenus might be grouped in three
main groups, i.e. T. gracilis which is sistergroup to the rest of the species, and two sister-
groups comprised of five species each, viz. T. carinatus, T. vohimavensis, T. platypterus, T.
longiflorus and T. pervillei, and T. boivinii, T. antaisaka, T. umbellatus, T. longifolius
and T. tubiflorus, respectively. T. gracilis differs from the rest of the species by lacking
all of the four characters ch. 13 (calyx lobes long coalescent), ch. 20 (tube more than twice
the calyx length), ch. 22 (coronula present) and ch. 26 (large anthers). However, ch. 13
and ch. 26 are absent also in T. tubiflorus and ch. 22 is absent in T. antaisaka and T.
umbellatus and reversals in these characters are proposed as the m o s t parsimonious solu­
tion. There are also four specimens of T. gracilis at the far south of its distribution area
                                                             — 48 —

PI. 2. — Cladogram showing the phylogenetic relationship between the species of Tachiadenus. The groupings,
      designated by a letter, are discussed in the text (see Phylogeny). The apomorphies are indicated with bars
      and numbers explained in Table 1. Crossed bars indicate a supposed reversal of an earlier acquired charac­
     ter. Apostrophes " ' " after a number indicate homoplastic characters with the number of the apostrophes
      equalling the number of supposed additional parallelisms occuring within Tachiadenus. A data matrix of the
      characters is presented in Table 2.
            — 49 —

TABLE 1 : Characters used in the cladistic analysis of the genus Tachiadenus.  The numbers
      correspond to the numbers in the cladogram ( P I . 2).

APOMORPHIC                                                    PLESIOMORPHIC

STEM                                                          STEM

  1. Without lines or wings.                                  With lines or wings.
  2. Lines situated close to each other in two opposite       Lines situated at equal distance from each other in two
                                                              opposite pairs decurrent between the attachments of the
      pairs decurrent below the attachment of the leaves.     leaves.
                                                              Without or with few papillae and only inside the edg­
  3. With many papillae at the nodes on the edging be­        ing.
      tween the leaves (i.e. petiole bases).
                                                              LEAVES
LEAVES
                                                              Petiole ± short or leaves sessile.
  4. With long, distinct petiole.                             Not amplexicaul.
  5. Amplexicaul.                                             Acute.
  6. Obtuse.                                                  Glabrous.
  7. Hairy.
                                                              INFLORESCENCE
INFLORESCENCE
                                                              Cymes with long internodes ; bracts of normal leaf-
  8. Cymes with shortened internodes and the subten­          size.
      ding leaves (bracts) to the flowers (at least the ones
      of the uppermost flowers) ± reduced.                    Cymes with shortened or long internodes but not to­
                                                              tally suppressed ; bracts of normal leaf-size or reduced
  9. Inflorescence umbel-shaped, i.e. cymes with very         but not totally suppressed.
      short internodes and bracts very small or scale­
      like.                                                   CALYX

CALYX                                                         Epidermis of calyx smooth.
                                                              Lobes of ± equal size.
10. Calyx with small epidermal papillae.                      Lobes overlapping at the base.
11. Lobes of different size.
12. Lobes not overlapping at the base.                        Lobes short coalescent, ca. 1/5 of their length or less.
13. Lobes long coalescent, ca. 1/3 of their length or
                                                              Lobes straight.
      more.                                                   Lobes ± linear or gradually tapering from the base.
14. Lobes bent outwards.                                      Lobes flat or keeled to undistinctly winged.
15. Lobes with the outermost part distinctly dilated.         Calyx with five or no wings.
16. Lobes on the dorsal side with distinct wings              Wings gradually tapering.

      > 1 mm.                                                 COROLLA
17. Calyx with ten wings.
18. Wings ± abruptly tapering near the apex.                  Tube short.
                                                              Tube twice the calyx length or shorter.
COROLLA                                                       Lower part does not harden or broaden but sometimes
                                                              with hardened veins only.
19. Tube long.                                                Without coronula.
20. Tube more than twice as long as the calyx.
21. Lower 1/3 of the tube hardened and broadened at           Coronula not callus-like.
                                                              Without such hairs.
      late anthesis.                                          Petals with elongated flat cells.
22. Coronula ± distinct, consisting of knobs or ring-
                                                              ANDROECIUM
     shaped.
23. Coronula ring-shaped, callus-like.                        Anthers short, < 5 mm long.
24. With epidermal hairs at the base of the limb.             Anthers forming a tube ; each anther as broad at the
25. Petals with ± rounded and convex epidermal cells.         base as at the apex.
                                                              Apical appendix thin.
ANDROECIUM                                                    Thecae bases without appendices.

26. Anthers large, > 5 mm long.
27. Anthers forming a cone ; each anther broader at

     the base than at the apex.
28. Anthers with large, large-celled apical appendix.
29. Thecae bases with appendices.
            — 50 —

APOMORPHIC                                             PLESIOMORPHIC

GYNOECIUM                                              GYNOECIUM

30. Capsule narrow, narrowly ovoid to narrowly el­     Capsule broad, ellipsoid to usualy ovoid or broadly
     lipsoid.                                          ovoid.
                                                       Each carpel of the capsule with mid-nerve prominent
31. Each carpel of the capsule with several prominent  only.
     veins.                                            Surface ± smooth.
                                                       Ovary truly bilocular at least towards the base.
32. Surface of capsule rough.                          Mid-walls partially membranaceous.
33. Ovary pseudo-bilocular.
34. The two protruding mid-walls in capsule entirely   Placenta not hard.

     coriaceous.                                       SEEDS
35. Placenta in fruit hard and involute.
                                                       Seeds small, < 0.6 x 0.6 mm.
SEEDS                                                  Seeds ± cubical.
                                                       Testa cells ± isodiametric.
36. Seeds large, > 0.6 x 0.6 mm.                       Walls not much protruding.
37. Seeds spherical.
38. Testa cells star-shaped.
39. Walls of testa cells much protruding.

with tubes slightly longer than twice the calyx length, which are, however, not taken into
consideration here.

       N O D E D , E, F : Six taxa are joined by the single ch. 16 (distinct calyx wing). This is a
weak character which has arisen several times. In Exacum (KLACKENBERG, 1985) the same
problems with this character with delimitation and parallelism are observed. Within
Tachiadenus three parallelisms are supposed, viz. in T. gracilis, T. umbellatus and T. longi-
folius. The delimitation of what is a wing is of course somewhat arbitrary. As drawn
here, i.e. distinct wing wider than 1 m m , some specimens of T. longiflorus fall outside the
definition by having somewhat narrower wings, but they are always distinct. T. gracilis is
usually furnished with a narrow keel only but a few specimens from southeast Madagascar
have slightly wider wings exceeding 1 mm which is marked with a ? in the cladogram. The
six taxa joined at node D are on general resemblance grouped in two groups, viz. T. carina-
tus and T. vohimavensis, and T. platypterus, T. longiflorus and T. pervillei,
respectively. T. vohimavensis is obviously a small segregate of T. carinatus with which it is
joined by the structure of the calyx wing (ch. 18, wing broad and rather abruptly narrowing
at the apex). The other group is here presented with T. pervillei separate. This species,
however, is united with T. platypterus subsp. platypterus by ch. 15 (broadened calyx lobes)
and T. pervillei could be equally parsimoniously placed as sistergroup to T. platypterus
subsp. platypterus and with a reversal in ch. 6 (obtuse leaves). Being indistinct, however,
ch. 15 in T. pervillei is considered doubtful. I also prefer to avoid to present a cladogram
showing a subspecies more closely related to another species than to the other subspecies of
the same species. This is, however, also a possible solution though rarely accepted (see
also KLACKENBERG, 1985, species concept, for an example in Exacum). However, the two
subspecies of T. platypterus, T. longiflorus and T. pervillei are considered closely related.
                            — 51 —

TABLE 2 : D a t a matrix of the characters used in the cladistic analysis of the genus Tachiade­
      nus. The numbers correspond to the characters described in Table 1. 0 = plesiomor-
      phic state ; 1 = apomorphic state ; — = neither state (homology absent) ; ? = char­
      acter indistinct.

                               SPECIES

       ORN GRA CAR VOH PLA PLA LFL PER BOI ANT UMB LFO TUI
                                                pla ang

C      10   0   0  0     0  0       0   0 0/1 0   0  0     1

H  20       0   0     1  0  0       0   0   0  0  0  0

A  30       0   0     1  0  0       0   0   0  0  0  0     0

R  4 0/1 * 0    0  0     0  0       0   0   0  0  0     1  1

A  50       0   0  0     0  0       0   0   0  1  0  0     0

C  60       0 0/1 0         1 0/1 0/1 0     0  0  0  0     0

T  7     1  0   0  0     0  0       0   0   0  0  0  0     0

E  80       0   0  0     0  0       0   0   1  1  1  1     1

R  90       0   0  0     0  0       0   0   0  1  1  1     1

   10 0/1 ** 0  0  0     0  0       0   0   0  1  0  0     0

N  11  0    0   0  0     0  0       0   0   0  0  0  0     1

U 12 0      1   1  I     1  1       1   1   1  1  1  1     0

M 13 0      0   1  1     1  1       1   1   1  1  1  1     0

B 14 0      0   0  0     1  0       0   0   0  0  0  0     0

E  15  0    0   0  0     1  0       0   1?  0  0  0  0     0

R  16  0 0/1    1  1     1  1       1   1   0  0  1  1     0

   17 0     0   0  0     0  0       1   0   0  0  0  0     0

   18 0     0   1  1     0  0       0   0   0  0  0  0     —

   19 0     1   1  1     1  1       1   1   1  1  1  1     1

   20 0/1 * 0   1  1     1  1       1   1   1  1  1  1     1

   21  0    0   0  ?     0  0       0   0   0  0  ?  1     1

   22  0    0 0/1  1     1  1       1   1   1  0  0  1     1

   23 — — 0        0     0  0       0   0   0  ——    1     1

   24 0     0   0  0     0  0       0   0   0  0  0  0     1

   25  1    1   1  1     1  1       1   1   1  1  1  1     1

   26  0    0   0  0     1  1       1   1   1  1  1 0/1

   27  0    0   0  0     0  0       0   0   0  0  0  0     1

   28  0    0   0  0     0  0       0   0   0  0  0  0     1

   29  0    0   0  0     0  0       0   0   0  0  0  0     1

   30 0     1   1  1     1  1       1   1   1  1  1  1     1

   31  0    0   0  7     0  0       0   0   0  0  7  0     1

   32  0    0   0  7     0  0       0   0   0  0  7  0     1

   33  0    1   1  1     1  1       1   1   1  1  1  1     1

   34  0    1   0  7     1  1       1   1   1  0  0  0     1

   35  0    0   0  0     0  0       0   0   0  0  0  0     1

   36 0     0   0  7     0  0       0   0   0  0  ?  1     1

   37 0     0   0  7     0  0       0   0   0  0  ?  0     1

   38  1    1   1  1     1  1       1   1   1  1  1  1     1

   39 0     0   0  7     0  0       0   0   0  0  ?  0     1

      * Ornichia trinervis has distinct petioles and long corolla tube.

      ** Usually the calyx is devoid of papillae but in some specimens the calyx is sparsely furnished with longer
papillae/hairs.
                                                              — 52 —

      N O D E G , H : T h e third group comprising T. boivinii, T. antaisaka, T. umbellatus, T.
longifolius and T. tubiflorus is characterized by a transformation of the inflorescence, first
at node G with ch. 8 (shortened internodes in the inflorescence) and also at node H by ch.
9 (inflorescence umbel-shaped). This transformation of cymes is also observed in the
Malagasy and Socotrian species of Exacum but not within their Asian population (KLAC­
KENBERG, 1985). Though this character is supposed to have arisen several times within
Exacum the most parsimonious solution in Tachiadenus is to propose one single transfor­
mation in that direction.

      N O D E I : The species pairs T. antaisaka and T. umbellatus, and T. longifolius and T.
tubiflorus are well corroborated. The two local endemics T. antaisaka and T. umbellatus
are united by two reversals, in ch. 22 (coronula present), found also only in the distantly
related T. gracilis, a n d ch. 34 (septa entirely coriaceous) found also in T. gracilis and T.
carinatus.

       N O D E J : T. longifolius and T. tubiflorus form a well corroborated group united by
four unique characters, viz. ch. 4 (long petiole), ch. 21 (lower part of corolla hardening in
fruit), ch. 23 (coronula ring-formed) and ch. 36 (large seeds). The reversal of ch. 26 (long
anthers) in T. tubiflorus might also be placed at node J as short anthers sometimes occur in
T. longifolius as well. It is interesting to note the many autapomorphies attributed to T.
tubiflorus. According to the characters observed, T. tubiflorus has undergone 24 evolu­
tionary steps, compared to the single (doubtful) one for T. gracilis.

                                                PHYTOGEOGRAPHY (PI. 3)

       Tachiadenus is endemic to Madagascar where it is distributed along the eastern coast
and the central mountain chain from sea-level up to almost 2000 m. It is also found in the
northern part of the west coast in the island of Nossi Be and the adjoining part of the main
island. This corresponds with the East Malagasy Region of WHITE (1983) based on HUM­
BERT (1955). The species are usually restricted to only one each of the phytogeographical
Domains presented in WHITE (1983). They are absent from the Domain of the High
Mountains, but present in the other three. T. longifolius and T. tubiflorus are found in
the southern and northern parts of the Eastern Domain, respectively. T. pervillei is res­
tricted to the island of Nossi Be in the Sambirano Domain and T. longiflorus, T. platypte­
rus, T. antaisaka, T. umbellatus and T. vohimavensis are all found only in the elevated
Central D o m a i n . T. boivinii is mainly found in the Sambirano Domain but also in the ad­
joining part of the more elevated Central Domain in Tsaratanana. Finally, the two widely
 spread and sympatric T. gracilis and T. carinatus are distributed in almost the whole of the
 Eastern Domain, but reach also the more elevated ( > 800 m altitude) contiguous parts of
 the Central Domain.

       A brief comment on the cladogram (PI. 2 and 3) with reference to vicariance biogeo-
 graphy may be of interest. The north-south vicariance along the shore within the Eastern
 Domain between T. longifolius and T. tubiflorus is distinct and well corroborated. The
 likewise north-south vicariance in the southern mountain chain between T. antaisaka and T.
                                                                              — 53 —

P I . 3. _ Phytogeography : The generalized distribution of the species of Tachiadenus compared with the phyto-
      geographical regions of HUMBERT (1955), recently also presented by WHITE (1983). The regions are : East
      Malagasy Region : 1, Eastern Domain ; 2 , Sambirano Domain ; 3 , Central Domain ; 4, Domain of the high
      Mountains. West Malagasy Region : 5, Western Domain ; 6, Southern Domain. The species are abbreviated
      with the three first letters of their epithets except for LFL = T. longiflorus and LFO = T. longifolius. For
      the five species presented at the right-hand map, a cladogram showing the vicariance between the domains
      based on Tachiadenus is given.

umbellatus (Central Domain) is also obvious. It is further interesting to note that these
two species pairs, belonging to the Eastern and Central Domains, respectively, vicariate
between themselves. Furthermore, together they vicariate with the north-eastern T. boivinii
mainly from the Sambirano Domain. Thus, according to this only cladogram and there­
fore of course highly uncertain, Eastern and Central Domains should be more closely
related to each other than any of them is to the Sambirano Domain. The group united at
node D is too uncertain to render any comments. It may also be noted that the most pri­
mitive species, T. gracilis, is also the most widespread one.
                                                              — 54 —

                                                           TAXONOMY

TACHIADENUS Grisebach

      Gen. sp. Gent. : 200 (1839).

      TYPE-SPECIES : Tachiadenus carinatus (Desr.) Griseb. (lectotype, fide PFEIFFER, 1874).

      Unbranched to moderately branched erect herbs to shrublets, glabrous. Stem terete to
subquadrangular, 4-winged to 4-lineolate or without wings or lines ; wings or lines situated
at equal distance from each other or close to each other in two opposite pairs. Leaves
decussate, entire, narrowly ovate to elliptic to broadly ovate, attenuate to truncate at base,
tapering to a ± long petiole or sessile, rarely amplexicaul, acuminate to usually acute to
rounded, 3-5-nerved, parallel-nerved with nerves diverging from base of lamina, thin to ±
succulent. Flowers pentamerous, solitary or ± numerous in lax to dense cymes terminal at
the branches ; inflorescence sometimes with internodes much shortened, umbel-shaped.
Calyx actinomorphic to rarely asymmetric with two outer and narrower lobes and three
inner and broader ones ; lobes short to usually long coalescent, ca. 1/5 to 3/4 of their
lenght, usually narrow at base and not overlapping or broad and clearly overlapping, grad­
ually tapering at apex, acute to usually acuminate, with several rather prominent parallel
nerves, keeled to ± broadly winged on dorsal side or without wings ; wings if present one
along each mid-nerve at the sepals or rarely also along sutures between lobes, truncate to
usually tapering at base, somewhat abruptly to usually gradually tapering at apex, someti­
mes accrescent (?) in fruit, without prominent veins. Corolla actinomorphic, contorted in
aestivation with petals basally connate forming a long to very long tube, usually large,
eventually decidious after anthesis, rarely widening and hardening at lower part of tube at
late anthesis, with or without a coronula of small knobs above anthers or as a ring-formed
callus at mouth of tube, white or blue to violet ; lobes spreading (?), elliptic to broadly
ovate to almost rounded, obtuse to acuminate. Stamens inserted in tube at a distance
below the sinuses ; filaments very short, much shorter than anthers, free ; anthers not exserted
and ± cohering to each other in a ring, ± rectangular to somewhat conical, deeply cleft at
base, usually with a thin appendix at apex but rarely with larger and large-celled appendices
at apex and at thecae bases, straight, dehiscing by slits to base. Pollen grains isopolar,
radially symmetrical, 3-colporate, spheroidal to prolate, medium-sized with polar axis
27-45 fim and equatorial diameter 22-25 /jm ; exine ± smooth with slits or conical depres­
sions, with perforations. Ovary pseudo-bilocular due to parietal placentas protruding to
centre ; ovules many. Style filiform, long, straight. Stigma entire to faintly bilobed.
Fruit a capsule, narrowly ovoid to narrowly ellipsoid, gradually attenuate at apex, coria­
ceous and septicidally 2-valved ; protruding mid-walls usually entirely coriaceous to someti­
mes partially membranaceous. Seeds numerous, minute, angular to rarely rounded ; testa
cells with star-shaped walls.

      Genus of 11 species endemic to Madagascar found in the whole of the eastern region.
                              — 55 —

                              KEY TO THE SPECIES

1. Inflorescence condensed, ± umbel-shaped, with small bracts.

2. Calyx asymmetric with two narrower outer lobes and three broader inner ones ; lobes overlap­

ping at base                                                                     11. T. tubiflorus

2'. Calyx actinomorphic with five narrow lobes ; lobes not overlapping at base.

3. Calyx lobes with ± broad wing ( > 1 mm wide) on dorsal side ; leaves 3-nerved ; pedicels

         > 0.5 cm long.

         4. Leaves > 10 cm long, narrowly ovate to narrowly elliptic with rather long and distinct

         petiole                                                       10. T. longifolius

         4'. Leaves ca. 5 cm long, elliptic with indistinct petiole              9. T. umbellatus

3'. Calyx lobes keeled only, or with a narrow wing (< 1 mm wide) ; leaves 3-5-nerved ; pedi­

         cels < 0.5 cm long.

         5. Leaves amplexicaul ; calyx short, usually < 20 mm long, shorter than capsule

                                                                                   8. T. antaisaka

         5'. Leaves not amplexicaul ; calyx long, > 20 mm long, much longer than capsule

                                                                                   7. T. boivinii

1'. Inflorescence not umbel-shaped, flowers solitary or in lax mono- or dichasia with normal-sized

bracts.

6. Calyx lobes > 2 mm broad at middle of upper free parts which furthermore usually are con­

tracted at bases.

7. Calyx lobes coalescent 2/3 of their length or more with free elliptic part ; leaves usually

         broadly ovate to elliptic, obtuse, < 5 cm long              4. T. platypterus subsp. platypterus

7'. Calyx lobes coalescent ca. 1/2 of their length with free linear to narrowly elliptic part ;

         leaves narrowly elliptic, acute, > 5 cm long                              6. T. pervillei

6'. Calyx lobes narrow, gradually narrowing from base, < 2 mm broad at middle of free parts.

8. Calyx wings lacking and corolla tubes very long ( > 6 cm) and more than 3 times calyx

         length                                                                    7. T. boivinii

8'. Calyx wings present or absent ; if absent then corolla tube short (< 6 cm ; < 3 times

         calyx length).

         9. Leaves semiamplexicaul, sessile with leaf bases of opposite leaves almost adjoining

         and decurrent near each other between leaves.

         10. Calyx with additional wings along sutures between sepals, i.e. calyx 10-winged.

                                                                                 5. T. longiflorus

         10'. Calyx keeled or winged along mid-nerve of lobes only, i.e. 5-winged

                                                         4. T. platypterus subsp. angustialatus

         9'. Leaves not semiamplexicaul nor amplexicaul, usually ± petiolate with leaf bases de-

         current at equal distance from each other or in two opposite pairs decurrent below

         respective leaves.

         11. Calyx keeled only or with narrow wing usually < 1 mm wide ; corolla tube at

                 most ca. twice as long as calyx                                   1. T. gracilis

         11'. Calyx distinctly winged ; corolla tube more than twice as long as calyx.

                 12. Leaves narrowly ovate, acuminate ; corolla white  3. T. vohimavensis

                 12'. Leaves usually ± elliptic, acute to obtuse ; corolla blue to violet

                                                                                 2. T. carinatus

       1. Tachiadenus gracilis Griseb. — PI. 4 ; 15, A (map)

      In D C , Prodr. 9 : 82 (1845).

      LECTOTYPE (here selected) : Bojer s.n., Hab. in pratis humidis ad margines sylvarum ins. Mada­
gascar, 1830 (W).
                                                             — 56 —

      Unbranched to moderately branched herb with woody base, 0.2-1.1 m high ; branches
± erect ; internodes usually longer to much longer than leaves, especially at upper part of
stem. Stem subquadrangular, 4-lineolate ; lines situated at equal distance from each other.
Leaves very narrowly elliptic to narrowly ovate, 25-70 x 3-15 mm, gradually tapering at
base to indistinct petiole to subsessile, not amplexicaul, acute to acuminate, 3-nerved.
Flowers rather few, solitary or in mono- or usually dichasial lax cymes ; pedicels long,
usually between 2-7 cm, usually slightly bent just below flower. Calyx 15-35 mm long,
actinomorphic ; lobes coalescent ca. 1/5 of their length or less, subulate, not overlapping at
base ; wings usually absent but sometimes with keel or narrow wing < l(-2) mm wide.
Corolla blue to violet ; tube 20-35(-45) mm long, without coronula ; lobes ovate to elliptic,
15-25 X 7-15 mm, acute. Anthers 2.5-4 mm long, with thin and short appendix at apex.
Capsule narrowly ovoid to narrowly ellipsoid, 12-18 x 2-4 mm, shorter than calyx, with the
two protruding mid-walls entirely coriaceous.

       DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT : T. gracilis is distributed along the eastern coast of Mada-
gascar usually not far from the shore. It is found from sea level up to 1300 m altitude in
forest or grassland on sand or in marshes. Flowering specimens seen from March to
December.

       NOTES : This species is characterized by its narrow leaves and usually sparsely branched
habit, as well as the short corolla tubes (ca. twice the calyx length). There are a few speci-
mens, however, which have slightly longer tubes (three specimens from the southern locality
Fort-Dauphin area and one from unknown locality). These specimens have also other
traits of T. carinatus, e.g. shorter pedicels, narrowly winged calyx and calyx lobes coales-
cent slightly longer than is usual. The calyx wings, however, are always gradually tapering
towards the apex. In the north, T. gracilis has broader leaves and is less " gracile " ,
becoming somewhat similar in habit to T. carinatus.

       SPECIMENS EXAMINED. — TAMATAVE : Ambila (— Lemaitso), 1951, Benoist 809 (P) ; Sainte-Marie,
1850, Boivin s.n. (P) ; Ilaka, 1962, Bosser 17001 (MO, P) ; Tamatave, 1954, Bosser & Descoings 185
(MO) ; Pointe à Larrée, Catat 2528 (P) ; Env. de Maroantsetra, 1912, Perrier 9039 (P, S) ; Sainte-
Marie et Angontsi, Richard 15 (P). — TUXEAR : Manantenina, 1925, Decary 3867 (P) ; Fort-Dauphin,
1932, Decary 10015 (P) ; Just east of Mandrondromotra, about 20 km north of Fort-Dauphin, 30 m,
1970, Fosberg 52572 (MO) ; Env. de Fort-Dauphin près de Nahampohana (Nampoana), 1-25 m, Hum-
bert 5755 (P) ; Env. de Fort-Dauphin, forêt de Mandena, 1960, Keraudren 1049 (P) ; Env. de Fort-
Dauphin, 1970, Keraudren-Aymonin & Aymonin 24980, 25021 (P) ; Env. de Fort-Dauphin, 1897,
Paroisse 49 (P) ; Distr. de Fort-Dauphin, Mandronodromotra, 1959, Peltier 1507 (P). — FIANARANT-
SOA : Env. d'Ivohibe, ca. 1200 m, 1924, Armand 12 (P) ; Forêt à l'ouest de Vondrozo, 1963, Bosser
18632 (P, S) ; Prov. de Farafangana, Midongy du Sud, 1926, Decary 5012 (K, P) ; Forêt à l'est d'Ivo-
hibe, ca. 1000 m, 1924, Humbert 3173 (К, P, S) ; Haute vallée de l'Iatara, bassin du Manampatra,
500-800 m, Humbert 3406 (P) ; Entre le col du Kalambatitra et la vallée de la Manambolo, affluent de
l'Ianaivo (Ionaivo), 1300 m, 1933, Humbert 12098 (P, S) ; Distr. Ivohibe, Cant. Ivongo, 1961, Raza-
findrakoto 11580 RN (P) ; Farafangana, Inst. Malg. de Recherche appl. 2095 (P).

      INEXACT OR UNIDENTIFIED LOCALITIES : North Madagascar, Baron 6093 (BM, K, P) ; Madagascar,
Bernard 1903 (P) ; Madagascar, Bojer s.n. (P) ; Prov. de Mananjary, 1909, Geay 7203 (P) ; Madagas-
car, 1881, Lantz 20 (P) ; Entre le Matitana(na) et le Mananjary, 1911, Perrier 9071 (P) ; Bassin du
Manampatra(na), haute vallée du T(S)ankara, 700 m, 1919, Perrier 12597 (P) ; Madagascar, Richard
98 (P) ; Près de la forêt de Marovetsetra, Ivohibe-Bara, 1924, Herb. d'Alleizette 12 (P) ; Mauritius or
Madagascar, Herb. Brown & Hooker s.n. (К) ; s. l o c , Herb, du Petit-Thouars (P).
Pl. 4. — Tachiadenus gracilis : A, habit x 0.5 ; B, dissected upper part of flower x 1.5 ; C, part of calyx
      x 1.5 ; D, flower in fruit with corolla and most of calyx removed x 1.5 ; E, anther x 6. (A, Humbert
      12098, S ; B, C, E, Perrier de la Bâthie 12597, P ; D, Bosser 18632, S).
                                                              — 58 —

       2. Tachiadenus carinatus (Desr.) Griseb. — PI. 5 ; 15, B (map).

      Gen. sp. Gent. : 200 (1839).
— Lisianthus carinatus DESR. in LAM., Encycl. 3 : 658 (1792).

      LECTOTYPE (here selected) : Commerson s.n., Madagascar ( P ) .

       Unbranched to usually moderately (occasionally much) branched herb with woody base,
0.1-1 m high ; branches erecto-patent to erect ; internodes usually longer than leaves espe­
cially in upper part of stem. Stem subquadrangular, 4-winged to 4-lineolate ; wings or
lines situated at equal distance from each other. Leaves narrowly elliptic to elliptic to obo-
vate, 20-60 x 7-25(-35) mm, gradually tapering at base to indistinct petiole to sessile, not
amplexicaul, acute to obtuse, 3-nerved. Flowers few to rather many, solitary or in mono-
or usually dichasial rather lax cymes ; pedicels usually short but rarely up to 5 cm long,
usually bent. Calyx 12-22 m m long, actinomorphic ; lobes coalescent 1/3-1/2 of their
length, gradually tapering at apex, acuminate, not overlapping at base ; wings present,
rather broad, gradually narrowing at base, usually rather abruptly narrowing at apex, ca.
1-3 m m wide. Corolla blue to violet ; tube 3-6 cm long, usually with indistinct coronula of
small knobs above anthers ; lobes elliptic to broadly elliptic, 10-30 x 7-17 mm, acute to
obtuse. Anthers 3-5 m m long, with thin and short appendix at apex. Capsule narrowly
ovate, 13-18 x 3-4 m m , ± as long as the calyx, with two protruding mid-walls partially
membranaceous.

       DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT : T. carinatus is distributed along the whole of the eastern
coast of Madagascar. It usually grows on sand dunes or in marshes near the shore but it
is also known from grassland and savoka up to 1200 m altitude. This species flowers
throughout the year.

       NOTES : T. carinatus is occasionally similar to T. gracilis but differs by its broader
calyx wings, especially towards the apex, and by its usually longer corolla tubes. It also
has broader and ovate leaves (see also under Notes to T. gracilis). However, T. carinatus
is more closely related to T. vohimavensis, with which it shares some advanced characters,
e.g. the shape of the calyx wings. It differs, though, from this species for example by its
blue flowers.

       DESROUSSEAUX (1792 : 659) cited a specimen from Madagascar sent to LAMARCK by
J. MARTIN as well as a specimen in Herb. Commerson. There is n o sheet in Herb.
Lamarck in Paris of this species annotated about Madagacar or J. M A R T I N . There is,
however, a specimen of COMMERSON from Madagascar in the general herbarium, which I
have chosen as lectotype.

      SPECIMENS EXAMINED. — DIEGO-SUAREZ : Madagascar, Nosy Ngontsy (Angontsi), 1847-1852, Boi-
vin s.n. ( P ) ; Distr. Andapa, Cant. Doany, 1956, Christophe 8287 RN (P) ; Env. de Sambava, massif
d'Ambatobiribiry, 50-345 m, 1950, Humbert & Capuron 24447 ( P , S) ; P . K . 15, route Sambava-
Vohemar, 1967, Morat 2806 ( P ) . — TAMATAVE : Tamatave, 29.7.1912, Afzelius s.n. (K, S) ; R.N. 5,
ca. 5 km S of Foulpointe, 1984, Barnett & Dorr 252 (MO) ; Env. d'Ambila (— Lemaitso), 1951,
Benoist 775 ( P ) ; Entre Brickaville et Ambila, 1966, Boiteau 477 ( P , S) ; Sainte-Marie, 1849, Boivin
1792 ( P ) ; Foulpoint, Bojer s.n. ( P ) ; Along Route 2 from 45 km S of Tamatave to Tamatave, < 50 m,
Pl. 5. — Tachiadenus carinalus : A, habit x 0.5 ; B, dissected upper part of flower x 1.5 ; C, part of calyx
      x 1.5 ; D, flower in fruit with corolla and most of calyx removed x 1.5 ; E, anther x 6. (A Humbert
     20396, S ; B, C, E, Humbert & Capuron 24447, S ; D, Chapelier s.n., S).
                                                              — 60 —

1975, Croat 32441 (MO) ; Along Route 5 between Tamatave and Fenerive at PK 45, sea level, 1975,
Croat 32480 (MO) ; id., PK 61 near S edge of Onibe River, > 50 m, 1975, Croat 32522 (MO) ; id.,
PK 80-PK 100, 50 m, 1975, Croat 32577 (MO) ; Tamatave, 1926, Decary 4118 (P) ; Ambila au sud de
Tamatave, 1928, Decary 6392, 6349 (P) ; Foulpointe, 1941, Decary 16951 (P), 16973 (BM, P, S),
17008 (K, P) ; Foulpointe, 1941, Decary 16999 (P) ; Au sud de Tamatave, Tampina, 1942, Decary
17709 (K, P) ; Station Ivoloina, 1952-1955, Dequaire 27630 (MO, P) ; Saint Mary, Forbes s.n. (K) ; S
de Soanierana, Geay 6386 (P) ; Distr. de Fenerive, 1909, Geay 8958 (P) ; Ca. 60 km S of Fenerive,
near sea level, 1974, Gentry 11327 (MO, P) ; Hab. ad Tamatave, Majo 1822 (BM) ; Plage Foulpointe,
1964, Morat 439 (P) ; Route de Tamatave-Fenerive km 22, 1961, Peltier 3356 (P) ; Antetezambaro
(-Marotandrazana), 1964, Peltier 4624 (P) ; Près d'Ampasimeloka, 20 m, 1911, Perrier 7478 (P) ;
Mahambo, Prince d'Orléans s.n. (P) ; Mahanoro, 1966, Rakotozafy 581 (P) ; Ambila-Lemaitso, 1967,
Rosemolson 7 (P) ; Tamatave, 5 m, 1959, Schlieben 8009 (BM, K) ; Env. de Tamatave, 1912, Viguier
& Humbert 280 (P) ; Env. de Tamatave, 1906, Herb. d'Alleizette s.n. (P) ; Env. de Moramanga, 1906,
Herb. d'Alleizette s.n. (P) ; Tamatave, 1938, Herb. Jard. Bot. Tananarive 4086 (P) ; Ambila-
Lemaitso, 1967, Inst. Malg. Rech. Appi. 7 (P, S). — FIANARANTSOA : Farafangana, 1970, Boiteau
2094 (P) ; Mananjary, 1938, Decary 13676, 13789 (P) ; Farafangana, Inst. Malg. Rech. Appi. 2094 (P,
S). — TULEAR : Fort-Dauphin, Pic St. Louis, 1960, Bosser 14333 (MO, P) ; Fort-Dauphin, Chisel 64,
88 (P) ; Along road through mountain forest in Chaines Anosyennes from Ft. Dauphin to Ranoma-
fana (Ranamafona), 1-28 km from Route 10, 100-350 m, 1975, Croat 31783 (MO) ; Manantenina,
1925, Decary 3870 (P) ; Fort-Dauphin, 1926, Decary 4025 (P) ; Fort-Dauphin, 1932, Decary 9788 (P) ;
id., 9844 (P) ; Env. de Fort-Dauphin, base du Pic St. Louis, ca. 10 m, 1947, Humbert 20396 (P, S) ;
Fort-Dauphin, peuplement le long de la route de Lokaro, 1972, Jacquemin 1157 (P) ; Env. de Fort-
Dauphin, Pic St. Louis, 1960, Keraudren 1067 (P) ; Env. de Fort-Dauphin, 1970, Keraudren-Aymonin
& Aymonin 25020 (P) ; Route de Tananarive à 20 km de Fort-Dauphin, 1937, Herb. Jard. Bot. Tana-
narive 2634 (P).

      INEXACT OR UNIDENTIFIED LOCALITIES : S. loc., 24.7.1860, Andovant s.n. (K) ; Central Madagas-
car, Baron 1512 (K, P) ; Tamatave to capital, 1891, Baron 5984 (K) ; Route de ? Vinanobe, 1972, Boi-
teau 2516 (P, S) ; Mohialamho, 1972, Boiteau 2560 (P) ; Hab. in prov. Be-tani-mena, Bojer (Boyer)
s.n. (K) ; Interior of Madagascar, Bojer ? 1857 (K) ; Madagascar, Bojer s.n. (P) ; Belavena, Catat
4328 (P) ; Madagascar, Chapelier s.n. (P, S) ; Madagascar, Commerson s.n. (P) ; 3-5 m, 1946, Cours
2935 (P, S) ; Didy à Brickaville, Cours 4648 (P, S) ; In forest between Tamatave and capital, Elliot
1782 (K, P) ; S. loc., Elliot 2146 (BM) ; Entre Tamatave et Tananarive, 1869, Gaillardot 115 (P) ;
Prov. de Mananjary, 1909, Geay 7124, 7406, 7442, 7519, 7587 (P) ; Madagascar, Gerrard 128, s.n.
(K) ; Coast to capital, Kitching s.n. (K) ; Madagascar, Lam & Meeuse 5498 (P) ; Sakafotsy, 1000-1200
m, 1881, Lantz s.n. (P) ; Madagascar, Lyall 259 (K) ; Between Tamatave and Tananarive, Herb. Com-
merson & Hooker, 1862, Meller s.n. (K) ; Entre le Matitana(na) et le Mananjary, 1911, Perrier 9071
(P) ; Madagascar, Perrottet 1820 (P) ; Madagascar, Herb. Maire, Perrottet s.n. (P) ; Madagas-
car, Herb. Barbier, Pourret s.n. (P) ; Sainte-Marie, Antongil et Angontsi, Richard 15 (P) ; Prov.
d'Andovoranto, Distr. Anivorano, 1912, Viguier & Humbert 458 (P) ; Tamatave, Be-tani-mena, Herb.
Blackburn s.n. (K) ; S. loc., Herb. Drake s.n. (P) ; Madagascar, Herb. Lamarck 4 (P) ; S. loc., Herb.
Petit-Thouars s.n. (P) ; Madagascar, Herb. Poiret s.n. (P) ; Madagascar, Herb. Richard & Herb.
Drake s.n. (P) ; S. loc., s. coll., no. 400 (P) ; S. loc., s. coll., no. 1512 (P) ; S. loc., s. coll. (?Cours),
no. 2935 (MO).

3. Tachiadenus vohimavensis Humbert. — PI. 6 ; 15, C (map).

      Adansonia, ser. 2, 3 (3) : 349 (1963).

      TYPE : Humbert 20719, Tulear, Bassin de la Manampanihy, mont Vohimavo au nord d'Ampasi-
mena, alt. 830 m, March 1947 (hoio-, P) ; only known material.

       Moderately branched shrublet, ca. 0.5 m high ; branches ± erect ; internodes varying

in length but usually shorter than leaves. Stem subquadrangular, 4-winged ; wings situated
Pl. g. — Tachiadenus vohimavensis : A, habit x 0.5 ; B, dissected upper part of flower x 1.5 ; C, part of calyx
      x 1.5 ; D, anther x 6. (A-D, Humbert 20719, P).
                                                               — 62 —

close to each other in two opposite pairs. Leaves narrowly ovate, 35-50 x 10-13 mm,
rather abruptly tapering at base to short petiole, not amplexicaul, acuminate, 3-nerved.
Flowers few, usually solitary at ends of branches ; pedicels short, ca. 5 mm long, usually
bent. Calyx ca. 25 mm long, actinomorphic ; lobes coalescent ca. 2/5 of their length,
subulate, not overlapping at base ; wings present, broad, narrowing to truncate at base,
usually rather abruptly narrowing at apex, ca. 5 mm wide. Corolla white ; tube ca. 6-
 8 cm long, with distinct coronula of small knobs above anthers ; lobes broadly ovate, ca.
 19 x 13 m m , acute. Anthers ca. 5 m m long, with thin and short appendix at apex. Cap­
sule not seen.

       DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT : T. vohimavensis is endemic to the southeasternmost part
 of Madagascar, being known only from one collection from the Vohimavo peak at 308 m
 altitude. Flowering specimen seen from March.

       NOTES : T. vohimavensis differs distinctly from T. carinatus by its white corolla, wide
calyx wings and lanceolate and acuminate leaves, and, though only found once, must be
recognized as a separate species. It is furthermore characterised by the wings along the
stem, which are situated close to each other and below the point of attachment of the res­
pective leaves, and not, as is usually the case, situated below but between the two leaves.

       4. Tachiadenus platypterus Baker. — PI. 7 ; 15, C (map).

      J. Bot. 20 (in new ser. 11) : 172 (1882).

      LECTOTYPE (here selected) : Baron 218, Madagascar, chiefly in Betsileo-land, (K ; iso-, P , one leaf
only).

       Moderately branched herb with woody base, 20-40 cm high or probably more ; branches
erecto-patent to ± erect ; internodes rather short, usually shorter than leaves. Stem terete
to subquadrangular, 4-lineolate ; lines situated close to each other in two opposite pairs.
Leaves broadly ovate to elliptic to rarely narrowly elliptic, 3-6 x 0.5-2.5 cm, rounded to
truncate at base, sessile, semi-amplexicaul, acute to obtuse, 3-nerved. Flowers usually
rather many, solitary or in mono- or dichasial rather dense cymes ; pedicels short, ca. 5 mm
long, straight to bent. Calyx 20-35 mm long, actinomorphic ; lobes coalescent 1/2-3/4 of
their length, broadened in upper parts, not overlapping at base, acute to usually obtuse,
with upper parts bent outwards ; wings present, usually broad, gradually narrowing at both
ends, disappearing towards apex, accrescent (?) in fruit, 2-6 mm wide. Corolla white or
violet ; tube 7.5-12 cm long, with distinct coronula of small knobs above anthers ; lobes
broadly elliptic to almost rounded, 20-30 x 13-20 m m , acute to obtuse. Anthers 6-8 m m
long, with short and thin or often broad appendix at apex. Capsule narrowly ovoid, grad­
ually attenuate at apex, ca. 20 X 5 mm, slightly shorter than calyx, with two protruding
mid-walls entirely coriaceous.

      DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT : T. platypterus occurs in the southern half of the m o u n ­
tains of central Madagascar. It has been collected in forest, savoka, savannahs and scrub­
land as well as in grassland and marshes, between 700 and 1850 m. Flowering specimens
                                                                — 63 —

  seen from August to February and April to M a y . The four collections of T. platypterus
  subsp. angustialatus are recorded from rocks at an altitude of 1000 to 1850 m flowering in
  November and December.

        NOTES : T. longiflorus a n d T. platypterus are closely related a n d morphologically con­
 nected by the intermediate T. platypterus subsp. angustialatus. In mountainous central
 Madagascar these three taxa are distributed over a large part of the island. In the north
 from Lac Alaotra a n d south t o the Itremo Massif west of Ambositra T. longiflorus is
 found, characterized by having a calyx with extra wings along the sutures between the
 sepals, and long (ca. 1/2 of the calyx length) narrow calyx lobes. In the Itremo moun­
 tains, sympatric with T. longiflorus, and southwards t o the Kalambatitra mountains in the
 south, T. platypterus subsp. platypterus occurs. This taxon is characterized by short and
 broad calyx lobes (sepals coalescent > 2/3 of their length) and rather broad leaves. In
 southern Kalambatitra a n d the Ivakoany Massif further south T. platypterus subsp. angus­
 tialatus is found. This subspecies is characterized by having a calyx with long narrow lobes
 as in T. longiflorus but without the extra wings along the sutures, i.e. as in T. platypterus
 subsp. platypterus. In southern Kalambatitra some intermediate forms between T. platyp­
 terus subsp. platypterus and T. platypterus subsp. angustialatus have been found, e.g. speci­
 mens with slightly broadened and shortened calyx lobes. As discussed above, there are
 three taxa of which one, T. platypterus subsp. angustialatus, is obviously devoid of unique
 advanced characters (autapomorphies). However, T. longiflorus and T. platypterus subsp.
platypterus are characterized by the unique extra calyx wings along the sutures between the
 sepals, and broad, flat calyx lobes, respectively. A s , where contiguous, T. longiflorus and
 T. platypterus subsp. platypterus are distinctly separated, these two taxa are treated as spe­
cies. On the contrary, T. platypterus subsp. platypterus and T. platypterus subsp. angus­
tialatus are not morphologically distinctly separated where sympatric. However, being
mostly allopatric and then always distinct, they are considered as subspecies.

       Tachiadenus platypterus Baker subsp. platypterus

       Leaves broadly ovate to elliptic to rarely narrowly elliptic, 3-6 x 1-2.5 cm, obtuse.
 Calyx 20-30 mm long ; lobes coalescent 2/3-3/4 of their length, distinctly broadened in
upper parts, acute to usually obtuse, with upper parts bent outwards ; wings present,
usually broad, 2-6 mm wide.

       SPECIMENS EXAMINED. — FIANARANTSOA : Env. de Ivohibe-Bara, ca. 1200 m, 1924, Armand 67

(P) ; Env. de Ranotsara et Ihosy, 1963, Bosser 18636 (P) ; Itremo, 1964, Bosser 19594 (P) (somewhat
deviating) ; Massif Ifandana, entre Ankaramena et Ihosy, 1300-1400 m, 1964, Capuron 23503 SF (P) ;
Distr. Ambalavao, Canton d'Ambohimahamasina, village d'Ambohitrampanefy, 1100 m, 1955, Cours
5008 (MO, P) ; Pic d'lvohibe, 1500-1900 m, 1926, Decary 5399 (P) ; 50 km E of Ambalavao, 1000 m,
1968, Hoine 231 (K) ; Montagnes entre le col du Kalambatitra et la vallée de la Manambolo, affluent
de l'Ianaivo (Ionaivo), ca. 1400 m, 1933, Humbert 12115 (P, S) (both typical subsp. platypterus and
individuals intermediate between the two subspecies) ; Montagnes à l'ouest d'Itremo, ouest Betsileo,
pentes occidentales, 1500-1700 m, Humbert 28323 (P) ; Nord du Kalambatitra, entre Ranotsara et
Iakora, 700-900 m, 1973, Morat 4244 (P) ; Vallée de l'Itomampy, 800 m, Perrier 12647 (P, S) ; Distr.
Ivohibe, Cant. Antambohobe, 1962, Rakotoniaina 11986 RN (P) ; Distr. Ambalavao, Cant. Vohit-
saoka, 1955, Rakotovao 7273 RN (P) ; Id., 1958, 9897 RN (P) ; Id., R.N. 5, 1954, Rakotovao 6475
RN (P, S) ; Distr. Ambalavao, Cant. Sendrisoa, 1958, Rakotovao 9889 RN (P) ; Distr. Ambalavao,
                                                                           — 64 —

Pl. 7 . _ Tachiadenus platypterus : A, habit x 0 . 5 ; B, dissected upper part of flower x 1.5 ; C, C , part of
      calyx (C = subsp. platypterus ; C = subsp. angustialatus) x 1.5 ; D, flower in fruit with corolla and most
      of calyx removed x 1.5 ; E, anther x 6 . (A, Humbert 12115, S ; B, C, E, Bosser 18636 P ; C, Humbert
      11973, P ; D, Capuron 23503 SF, P).
                                                               — 65 —

 Vohitsaoka, Betainamboa, 1950, Razafindrakoto 2999 RN (P) ; Near Taolana, ca. 1200 m, 1941,
 Herb. Jard. Bot. Tananarive 4521 (P) ; Pied au l'Ambondrombe, 1941, 1200 m, Herb. Jard. Bot.
 Tananarive 4563 (P) ; Inaninoma près d'Ambohimahanasina, 1941, Herb. Jard. Bot. Tananarive
 4720 (P).

        INEXACT OR UNIDENTIFIED LOCALITIES : Chiefly in Betsileo-land, Baron 218 (K, P) ; Ankafana,
 1880, Cowan s.n. (P) ; Massif d'Andringitra, ca. 1600 m, 1922, Perrier 14468 (P) ; Distr. Ambalavao,
 Cant. Ambohimanina, Ambohibary, 1950, Razafindrakoto 2381 RN (P).

        Tachiadenus platypterus Baker subsp. angustialatus (Humbert) Klack., stat. nov.

 — Tachiadenus platypterus BAKER var. angustialatus HUMBERT, Adansonia, ser. 2, 3 (3) : 349 (1963).

       LECTOTYPE : Humbert 11973, Madagascar, Massif du Kalambatitra, Mont Analatsitendrika, 1750-
 1850 m, 1933 (P ; iso-, P, S) ; selected in herb.

        Leaves narrowly elliptic to narrowly ovate, 3-6 x 0.5-1 cm, acute to obtuse. Calyx
 25-35 mm long ; lobes coalescent 1/2-2/3 of their length, slightly broadened to usually
 subulate ; wings present, sometimes rather narrow but distinct, 0.5-2.5 mm wide.

       SPECIMENS EXAMINED. — FIANARANTSOA : Bassin supérieur de ITanaivo (Ionaivo), affluent du
 Mañanara, ca. 1000 m (ou Massif de l'Ivakoany, pentes NE, ca. 1100 m), 1928, Humbert 6973 (P,
 S) ; Massif du Kalambatitra, mont Analatsitendrika, 1750-1850 m, 1933, Humbert 11973 (P, S) ;
Entre le col du Kalambatitra et la vallée de la Manambolo, affluent de l'Ianaivo (Ionaivo), 1200-1400
m, 1933, Humbert 12093 (P) ; Centre-Sud, Massif de l'Ivakoany, pentes orientales du massif,
 1250-1400 m, 1933, Humbert 12269 (P).

       5. Tachiadenus longiflorus Bojer ex Griseb. — PI. 8 ; 15, D (map).

      Gen. sp. Gent. 202 (1839).

      LECTOTYPE (here selected) : Bojer s.n., Hab. copiose in montib. prov. Emirna, Madagascar (K ;
iso-, P).

Unbranched to moderately branched shrublet, 0.2-0.8 m high ; branches ± erect ; inter-
nodes usually shorter than leaves. Stem terete to subquadrangular, 4-lineolate ; lines situated
close to each other in two opposite pairs. Leaves narrowly elliptic to narrowly ovate, 25-50
 x 5-15 mm, gradually tapering at base to indistinct petiole to sessile, semi-amplexicaul,
acute to obtuse, 3-nerved. Flowers usually rather few, solitary or in mono- or dichasial
usually rather lax cymes ; pedicels short, 5-10 mm long, straight to bent. Calyx 25-40 mm
long, actinomorphic ; lobes coalescent 2/5 to 1/2 of their length, subulate, not overlapping
at base ; wings present and with one extra wing along each suture between sepals, rather
narrow but distinct, gradually narrowing at both ends but the ones along the sutures often
± truncate or semi-sagittate at apex (i.e. at lobe sinuses), 0.5-1.5 mm wide. Corolla white,
sometimes (?) with violet blotch at the very throat ; tube 7.0-12 cm long, with distinct coro-
nula of small knobs above anthers ; lobes obovate to broadly ovate, 15-30 x 7-20 mm,
acute to obtuse. Anthers 5.5-8 mm long, with short and thin or often broad appendix at
apex. Capsule narrowly ovoid, gradually attenuate at apex, 16-18 x 4-6 mm, much shor-
ter than calyx, with two protruding mid-walls entirely coriaceous.
                                                                             — 66 —

       DISTRIBUTION A N D HABITAT : T. longiflorus is distributed in mountainous Central

Madagascar around Lac Alaotra in the north to the Ankaratra and Itremo Massifs in the

south. It is recorded from 8 0 0 - 1 8 0 0 m and grows in dry grass- and scrubland in clayey

and stony soils. Flowering specimens seen from August to June.

       NOTES : The extra calyx wings of T. longiflorus are especially well developed in the

northern part of the distribution area around Ambatondrazaka where they usually are semi-

sagittate and sometimes even two along each suture. On the contrary, in the south (region

Ambositra/Itremo) the extra wings are usually less prominent and tapering or occasionally

even missing at some of the sutures. The latter specimens are morphologically close to T.

platypterus subsp. angustialatus from the far south-east of the island, which, however,

always totally lack the extra calyx wings. See also under Notes to T. platypterus.

       GRISEBACH (1839 : 2 0 2 ) cited in the protologue collections of Lyall a n d of Bojer

(« Boyer ») in Herb. Hooker. I have chosen as lectotype the BOJER specimen which was

probably also the base of BOIER'S manuscript name.

      SPECIMENS EXAMINED. — MAJUNGA : Distr. Tsaratanana, Cant. Andriamena, Telomita, Androfia,
1100 m, 1964, Service Eaux Forêts Madagascar 21875 SF (P). — TAMATAVE : Ambatondrazaka,
Manaka-Est, 1954, Botoalina 6975 RN (P, S) ; Sud de Moramanga, 1930, Decary 6976 (P, S) ; Mora-
manga, 1930, Decary 7228 (P) ; Ambatondrazaka, 1941, Decary 16456 (BM, P) ; Lac Alaotra, entre
Menasaka et Ambodiriana, bords du Maningory, 1944, Homolle 516 (P) ; Ca. 48 km S Ambatondra-
zaka, 2 km S Beforo on the road to Moramanga, 850 m, 1978, Jonsson 1020 (P) ; Distr. Ambaton-
drazaka, Manakambahiny Est, 1959, Rakatovao 10521 RN (P) ; Canton Manakambahiny Est, Distr.
Ambatondrazaka, Ankarongana, 1949, Ramanantsoavina 1794 RN (P, S) ; Distr. Ambatondrazaka,
Manakambahiny Est, 1948, Ratoto M de D & Ramarokoto 1546 (P) ; Prov. d'Andovoranto, Distr. de
Moramanga, env. de Moramanga, 900 m, 1912, Viguier á Humbert 1031 (P) ; Andranokobaka, Mora-
manga, 1951, Service Eaux Forêts Madagascar 3240 SF (P) ; Andranokobaka, 1951, 5. coll. no. 3240
(P, S). — TANANARIVE : Tananarive, 1903, Bernard s.n. (P) ; Ambatolaona, 1937, Boiteau 2397 (P) ;
Vallée de Soarina, P.K. 23, route de Tamatave, 1961, Bosser 14868 (MO) ; Angavokely 30 km E
Tananarive, 1949, Capuron 72 SF (P) ; Ambatolaona, 1921, Decary 580 (P) ; Ambohimanga, 1921,
Decary 653 (P) ; Ambohimanga, près de Tananarive, 1928, Decary 6151 (K, P) ; Ilafy, 1917, Decary
s.n. (P) ; Tsimbazaza, 1917, Decary s.n. (P) ; R.N. 2, E of Antananarivo at second crossing of the
Ampasibe River, 1985, Dorr 3681 (MO) ; Env. d'Arivonimamo, ca. 8 km sur la route d'Ahitrambo,
1957, Descoings 2885 (MO) ; Rock outcrops NW of Behenjy on road from Antananarivo to Antsi-
rabe, 1986, Dorr, Barnett & Rakotozafy 4568 (MO) ; Distr. Ankazobe, Cant. Manolaza, Manankazo,
forêt d'Ambohitantely, 1948, Jean de Dieu 171 RN (P) ; Entre Arivonimamo et Soamananety, 1960,
Peltier 1818 (P) ; Andranavelona, route N4, 1963, Peltier 4469 (P) ; Ambohimanga, Soavinimerina,
1967, Rosamolson 6 (P) ; Tananarive, Ambohimanga 1921, Waterlot 61 (P) ; Ilafy, 1905, Herb.
d'Alleizette 378 (P) ; Mahitsy, 1942, Herb. Jard. Bot. Tananarive 5038 (P). — FIANARANTSOA : 46 km
E of Ambatofinandrahana (Fiandrahanom), 1350 m, 1975, Croat 29509 (MO) ; Along Route 35, 54
km E of Ambatofinandrahana (Finandrohana), 1300 m, 1975, Croat 29676 (MO) ; Massif de l'ltremo,
vicinity of Col de Itremo, 1500-1685 m, 1975, Croat 29870 (MO) ; Env. de Ambatofinandrahana,
1600-1800 m, 1938, Decary 13058, 13243 (P) ; Ambositra, bois de Tapia, 1942, Decary 17267 (P) ;
Ambatofinandrahana, 1942, Decary 17389 (P) ; Montagnes à l'ouest d'Itremo, ouest Betsileo, 1500-
1700 m, 1955, Humbert 30028 (P, S) ; Environs d'Ambatofinandrahana, Betsileo, 1400-1500 m, Hum-
bert & Capuron 28127 (P, S) ; Dt. Fandriana, Sandrandahy, 1960, Peltier 2221 (P) ; Soanieranana, col
d'Antoetra, Dt. d'Ambositra, 1960, Peltier 2232 (P) (somewhat deviating) ; Env. d'Ambositra,
1400 m, 1911, Perrier 9044 (P) ; Mantasoa, 1905, Académie Malgache s.n. (P) ; Ankatso, 1942, Herb.
Jard. Bot. Tananarive s.n. (P).

       INEXACT OR UNIDENTIFIED LOCALITIES : Chiefly in Betsileo-land, Baron 130, 163 (K) ; Central
Madagascar, Baron 384 (K, P), s.n. (P) ; In altis montibus Madagascar, Blackburn s.n. (K) ; Ferme
séricole IMRA, Mahabo, 1970, Boiteau 2001 (P, S) ; Prov. Imerina (Emerinae, Emirna), Bojer s.n.
(K, P) ; Imerina, 1887, Campenon s.n. (P) ; Sampatra, 1889, Catat 1705 (P) ; Distr. Ambatondrazaka,
                                                                             — 67 —

Pl. 8. — Tachiadenus longiflorus : A, habit x 0.5 ; B, dissected upper part of flower (B' = petal lobe from
     different collections) x 1.5 ; C, part of calyx x 1.5 ; D, flower in fruit with corolla and most of calyx
      removed x 1.5 ; E, anther x 6. ( A C , E, Boiteau 2001, S ; B', Ramananboavina 1794 RN, S ; D, Botoalina
     6975 RN, S).
                                                            — 68 —

Ankaroka, 1300 m, 1938, Cours 29 (P) ; Moyenne vallee du Mangoro, 1942, Decary 18498 (P) ;
Madagascar, Elliot 1939 (K, P) ; S. loc, 1892, Geneaud 2 (P) ; Prov. Imerina, 1880, Hildebrandt 3492
(K, P) ; Tamatave, 1887, Le Myre de Vilers s.n. (P) ; Madagascar, Lyall 258, 358 (K) ; Central Mada­
gascar, Parker s.n. (K) ; Mangoro, 1912, Perrier 9041 (P) ; Madagascar, Prince d'Orlians s.n. (P) ;
Prov. d'Andovoranto, Distr. de Moramanga, d'Ankarefo, 800-900 m, 1912, Viguier & Humbert 1184
(P) ; Plateau de Soavenimerina, 1967, Inst. Malgache Rech. Appl. 6 (S) ; Antsihanaka, Herb. Jard.
Hot. Tananarive s.n. (P).

       6. Tachiadenus pervillei H u m b e r t ex Klack., sp. nov. — PI. 9 ; 15, D (map).

— Tachiadenus pervillei HUMBERT, Adansonia, ser. 2, 3 (3) : 349 (1963), nom. non rite publ.

      TYPE : Pervitin s.n., Madagascar, He Nossi Beh, 1853 (holo-, P ; iso-, P).

       Moderately branched shrublet, height unknown ; branches ± erect ; internodes much
shorter than leaves. Stem terete to subquadrangular, 4-lineolate ; lines situated rather close
to each other in two opposite pairs. Leaves narrowly elliptic, ca. 6-10 x 1.5-2.5 cm, atte­
nuate at base to ± distinct petiole or subsessile, semi-amplexicaul, acute, 3(-5)-nerved.
Flowers few, in mono- or dichasial cymes or solitary in terminal position in forks of
branches ; pedicels short, ca. 5 mm long. Calyx 28-37 mm long, actinomorphic ; lobes
coalescent ca. 1/2 of their length, slightly broadened at upper parts, not overlapping at
base, acute ; wings present, narrow to broad, gradually narrowing at both ends, disap­
pearing towards apex, accrescent (?) in fruit, 1-5 m m wide. Corolla : colour unknown ;
tube 9-13 cm long, with a ± distinct coronula of small knobs above anthers ; lobes obo-
vate, ca. 27 x 13 m m , acute to ± obtuse. Anthers ca. 8 m m long, with a thin and short
appendix at apex. Capsule narrowly ovate, gradually attenuate at apex, ca. 20 x 5 mm,
 shorter than calyx, with two protruding mid-walls entirely coriaceous.

       DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT : T. pervillei is a local endemic from the island of Nossi Be
 off the northwestern coast of Madagascar. Its ecological requirements and flowering
 period are not known. There are two collections of BOIVIN of this species of which one is
 said to originate from He Sainte-Marie on the east coast. The two specimens are identical.
 I consider this disjunction doubtful and the specimen is probably wrongly labelled.

       NOMENCLATURAL NOTE : A latin description of this species was given by HUMBERT (1963 :
 349). However, he did not assign any specific type material, hence the species according to
 the Code was not validly published (Article 37.1).

       SPECIMENS EXAMINED. — DIEGO-SUAREZ : Nossi Be, Herb. Drake, Boivin 19 (P) ; Nossi Beh,
 1853, Pervitin s.n. (P).

       DOUBTFUL LOCALITY : Sainte-Marie, Herb. Drake, Boivin 14 (P).

        7. Tachiadenus boivinii H u m b e r t ex Klack., sp. nov. — PI. 10 ; 15, E (map).

 — Tachiadenus boivinii HUMBERT, Adansonia, ser. 2, 3 (3) : 349 (1963), nom. non rite publ.

       TYPE : Perrier de la Bdthie 9053, Madagascar, Massif de Manongarivo (holo-, P ; iso-, P, S).

        Moderately branched shrublet, up to 1.5 m high ; branches ± erect ; internodes usually
 shorter than leaves. Stem terete, 4-lineolate ; lines situated rather close to each other in
Pl. 9. — Tachiadenus pervillei : A, habit x 0.5 ; B, dissected upper part of flower x 1.5 ; C, part of calyx
      ( C = calyx almost without wings from the same collection) x 1.5 ; D, flower in fruit with corolla and most
      of calyx removed x 1.5 ; E, anther x 6. (A-C, E, Pervillé s.n., 1853, P ; D, Boivin 19, P).
Pl. 10. — Tachiadenus boivinii : A, habit x 0.5 ; B, dissected upper part of flower x 1.5 ; C, part of calyx
      x 1.5 ; D, flower in fruit with corolla and most of calyx removed x 1.5 ; E, anther x 6. (A, Decary 1581,
      P ; B, C, E, Decary 1581, S ; D, Perrier de la Bâthie 9053, S).
                                                              — 71 —

two opposite pairs, sometimes distinct only immediately below leaves or almost absent.
Leaves narrowly ovate to rarely ovate, 5-12 x 1.5-4 cm, rather abruptly tapering at base to
very short petiole or rounded to truncate and sessile, not amplexicaul, acute, 3(-5)-nerved.
Flowers solitary or few together sometimes in ± umbel-shaped inflorescences (actually con­
densed cymes) terminal at branches ; pedicels short, usually < 5 mm long, straight. Calyx
25-40 mm long, actinomorphic ; lobes coalescent ca. 1/3 of their length, subulate, not over­
lapping at base ; wings absent but sometimes with keel < 0.5 mm high. Corolla white ;
tube 8-19 cm long, with distinct coronula of small knobs above anthers ; lobes ovate to
elliptic, 22-35 x 10-17 mm, acute to acuminate. Anthers 5.5-7 m m long, with thin and
long appendix at apex. Capsule narrowly ellipsoid, gradually attenuate at apex, 20-25 x
4-5 mm, much shorter than calyx, with two protruding mid-walls entirely coriaceous.

      DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT : T. boivinii is found within a rather small area in the
northwestern part of Madagascar, from the coast and the island Nossi Be, to the Tsarata-
nana mountains. It is recorded from 500 to 1400 m altitude (no notations from Nossi Be)
from shady but dry cliffs, dry open land or scrubland. Flowering specimens from
February, March, June and December.

      NOTES : This species is somewhat variable in the infloresence but a tendency towards
umbels is present, i.e. somewhat compressed inflorescences with rather small bracts.

      For note on nomenclature see T. boivinii.

      SPECIMENS EXAMINED. — DIEGO-SUAREZ : Lokobe (Loucoube), Nossi Be, 1851, Boivin s.n. (P) ;
Bejofo, Env. de Maromandia, Kapany, 1923, Decary 1581 (P, S), 1438, 2219 (P) ; Massif de Manon-
garivo, 500-1400 m, 1909, Perrier 9053 (P, S) ; Montagnes du Sambirano, 600-1000 m, 1923, Perrier
15532 (P, S) ; Distr. Ambanja, Cant. Marovato, R.N. 10, 1953, Safy 4967 RN (P).

       8. Tachiadenus antaisaka H u m b e r t . — PI. 11 ; 15, E (map).

      Adansonia, ser. 2, 3 (3) : 347 (1963).

      LECTOTYPE (here selected) : Humbert 6659, Madagascar, Massif du Beampingaratra, col de Vohi-
paha, (P ; iso-, P, S) ; selected in herb.

      Moderately branched shrublet, 0.1-1 m high ; branches ± erect ; internodes longer or
shorter than leaves. Stem subquadrangular, 4-lineolate ; lines situated at equal distance
from each other. Leaves ovate to narrowly ovate, 4-5 x 1.5-2.5 cm, rather abruptly taper­
ing at base or rounded to truncate, sessile, amplexicaul, acute, 5-nerved. Flowers solitary
or few together in umbel-shaped inflorescences (actually much condensed cymes) terminal
at branches ; pedicels short, ca. 3 mm long, straight. Calyx 15-20 mm long, actinomor­
phic ; lobes coalescent ca. 1/3 of their length, subulate, not overlapping at base ; wings
usually absent but sometimes with keel or narrow wing < 1 mm wide. Corolla white ;
tube 7-10 cm long, without coronula ; lobes ovate, ca. 15-25 x 7-15 mm, acute to ±
obtuse. Anthers 5-6 m m long, with a thin and short appendix at apex. Capsule narrowly
ovoid to narrowly ellipsoid, gradually attenuate at apex, ca. 15 x 5 m m , longer than calyx,
with two protruding mid-walls partly membranaceous.
Pl. 11. — Tachiadenus antaisaka : A, habit x 0.5 ; B, dissected upper part of flower x 1.5 ; C, part of calyx

      x 1.5 ; D, flower in fruit with corolla and most of calyx removed x 1.5 ; E, anther x 6. (A-E, Humbert
     13538, S).
                                                             — 73 —

       DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT : T. antaisaka is a local endemic known only from the
Beampingaratra mountains in the very southeastern part of Madagascar. It is recorded
from forest from 1100 to 2000 m altitude. Flowering specimens seen from October to
January.

      NOTES : This species is characterized by its sessile amplexicaul 5-nerved leaves. It is
the only species with a calyx covered by small epidermal papillae (lens !). See also Notes
to T. umbellatus.

       SPECIMENS EXAMINED. — TULEAR : Massif de l'Andohahelo, 1800-1979 m, 1928, Humbert 6180

(P) ; Id., 1700-1975 m, 1934, Humbert 13587 (P) ; Massif du Beampingaratra, col de Vohipaha, 1100-
1400 m, 1928, Humbert 6659 (P, S ) .

      INEXACT OR UNIDENTIFIED LOCALITIES : Mont Itrafanaomby (Ankazondrano) et ses contreforts S-W
(haut Mandrare), 1700-1963 m, 1 9 3 3 , Humbert 13538 (P, S ) .

       9. Tachiadenus umbellatus Klack., sp. nov. — PI. 12 ; 15, E (map).

      Species haec T . antaisaka affinis, a qua differt foliis non sessilibus trinervibus pedicellis longiori-
bus et alis calycis latioribus.

      Herba moderate ramosa, > 0,4 m alta ; rami plus minusve erecti; internodia folia aequantia vel
eis breviora. Caulis subquadrangularis, quandrialatus ; alae inter se ad distantiam aequalem dispositae.
Folia elliptica, ca. 5 x 2 cm, basi gradatim attenuata petiolis indistinctis, non amplexicaulia, acuta,
trinervia. Flores plerumque numerosi in inflorescentiis terminalibus umbelliformibus (reapse cymae
condensatae) ; pedicelli aliquanto breves, 10-15 mm longi, recti. Calyx 20-25 mm longus, actinomor-
phus; lobi ca. dimidium longltudinum suarum coalescentes, subulati, basaliter non superpositi; alae
praesentes, angustae, extremia ambo versus gradatim decrescentes, ad apicem acuminatae, 1-1,5 mm
latae. Corolla alba (fide coll.) ; tubus ca. 7 cm longus, sine coronula ; lobi late elliptici, ca. 2,5 x
2 cm, acuti. Antherae ca. 7 mm longae, ad apicem appendici tenues et aliquantum longae. Capsula
matura non visa.

      TYPE : Decary 4966, Fianarantsoa, province de Farafangana, Midongy du Sud, 1926 (holo-, P) ;
only material studied.

      A moderately branched herb, > 0.4 m high ; branches ± erect ; internodes as long as
or shorter than leaves. Stem subquadrangular, 4-winged ; wings situated at equal distance
from each other. Leaves elliptic, ca. 5 x 2 cm, gradually tapering at base to indistinct
petiole, not amplexicaul, acute, 3-nerved. Flowers rather many together in umbel-shaped
inflorescences (actually much condensed cymes) terminal at branches ; pedicels rather short,
10-15 mm long, straight. Calyx 20-25 m m long, actinomorphic ; lobes coalescent ca. 1/2
of their length, subulate, not overlapping at base ; wings present, narrow, gradually nar­
rowing at both ends, acuminate at apex, 1-1.5 m m wide. Corolla white (fide coll.) ; tube
ca. 7 cm long, without coronula ; lobes broadly elliptic, ca. 2.5 x 2 cm, acute. Anthers
ca. 7 mm long, with thin and rather long appendix at apex. Capsule (mature) not seen.

      DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT : T. umbellatus is endemic to the Massif du Midongy in the
southeastern part of Madagascar. It is known only from the type collection found in exposed
wet places. Flowering specimen seen from August.
                                                              — 74

        D

Pl. 12. — Tachiadenus umbellatus : A, habit x 0.5 ; B, dissected upper part of flower x 1.5 ; C, part of calyx
      x 1.5 ; D, anther x 6. (A-D, Decary 4966, P).

      NOTES : This species is allied to T. antaisaka. Both these taxa are found in the south­
eastern part of the island and both seem to be local endemics. T. umbellatus differs by its
3-nerved elliptic somewhat petiolated leaves, its longer pedicels and broader calyx wings. It
is considered, that, though it has been found only once, the relatively large differences with
T. antaisaka as well as all other species of Tachiadenus, require this taxon to be described
as a new species.
                                                               — 75 —

PI. 13. — Tachiadenus longifolius : A, habit x 0.5 ; B, dissected upper part of flower (B' = petal lobe from
     different individual of same collection) x 1.5 ; C, part of calyx x 1.5 ; D, flower in fruit with corolla and
      most of calyx removed (somewhat immature) x 1.5 ; E, anther x 6. (A, Capuron 28340 SF, P ; B, C , E,
     McWhirter 207, P ; D, Jacquemin 1178, P).
                                                             — 76 —

       10. Tachiadenus longifolius Scott Elliot. — PI. 13 ; 15, F (map).

      J. Linn. S o c , Bot. 29 (197) : 34 (1891).

      LECTOTYPE (here selected) : Scott Elliot 2719, Madagascar, Fort-Dauphin (K ; iso-, P).

       Unbranched to sparsely branched herb with woody base, up to 1 m high ; branches
erect; internodes shorter to much shorter than leaves. Stem terete, 4-lineolate ; lines situated
close to each other in opposite pairs. Leaves narrowly elliptic to narrowly ovate, 10-15 x
1.5-2 cm, gradually tapering at base to rather long petiole, not amplexicaul, acuminate, 3-
nerved. Flowers solitary or few together in terminal umbel-shaped inflorescences (actually
much condensed cymes) ; pedicels rather short, usually 5-15(-25) mm long, ± straight.
Calyx 25-40 mm long, actinomorphic ; lobes coalescent 1/2-3/5 of their length, subulate,
not overlapping at base ; wings present, broad, gradually narrowing at both ends, acumi­
nate at apex, 2-5 m m wide. Corolla white ; tube 7.5-15 cm long, with distinct coronula of
callus at mouth of tube ; lobes elliptic to broadly ovate, 20-45 x 11-22 mm, acute to ±
obtuse. Anthers 5-6.5 mm long, with thin and short appendix at apex. Capsule narrowly
ovoid, gradually attenuate at apex, ca. 20 x 6 mm, much shorter than calyx, with two pro­
truding mid-walls entirely coriaceous.

      DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT : T. longifolius is a local endemic restricted t o the very
southeasternmost part of Madagascar near Fort-Dauphin. It is recorded from open marshy
ground and from rain forest on lateric soil up to 100 m altitude. Flowering specimens seen
from February to May, September, November and December.

      NOTES : This species is allied to the likewise lowland T. tubiflorus found further north
along the coast, but differs clearly in several characters, e.g. the winged and subulate calyx
lobes.

      SPECIMENS EXAMINED. — TULEAR : A l'ouest d'Ebakika, ca. 50-100 m, au N de Fort-Dauphin,
1968, Capuron 28340 SF (P) ; Fort-Dauphin, Chisel 4076, s.n. (P) ; Fort-Dauphin, Sainte Luce, 1972,
Debray 1737 (P) ; N Fort-Dauphin, Sud massif Tsingafiafy, 1973, Debray 1999 (P) ; Fort-Dauphin,
Elliot 2719 (K, P) ; Fort-Dauphin, foret d'Esetra, 1972, Jacquemin 1178 (P) ; Ebakika, 50 km N of
Fort-Dauphin, 50 m, 1968, McWhirter 207 (K, P).

      DOUBTFUL LOCALITY : Prov. de Mananjary, 1909, Geay 7268, 7269, 7742 (P).

       11. Tachiadenus tubiflorus (Roem. & Schult.) Griseb. — PI. 14 ; 15, F (map).

      Gen. sp. Gent. : 202 (1839).
— Lisianthus tubiflorus ROEM. & SCHULT., Syst. Veg. 4 : 788 (1819).
— Tachiadenus elatus HEMSLEY, Hook. Ic. PI. 6 (3), tab. 2554 (1898). Lectotype (here selected) : Cur­

    tis s.n., Madagascar, Herb. ?Hitch 1897, (K ; iso-, P).

      TYPE : du Petit-Thouars s.n., Herb. Willdenow no. 3563, Lisianthus, (holo-, B-W, photograph
seen).

       Probably sparsely to moderately branched shrublet, up to 3 m high ; branches erecto-
patent ; internodes shorter than leaves. Stem terete, without lines. Leaves narrowly ellip­
tic to narrowly ovate to usually ovate, 10-18 x 4-7 cm, gradually tapering at base with
                                                         — 77 —

14. — Tachiadenus tubiflorus : A, habit x0.5 ; B, dissected upper part of flower (B' = configuration of the
stamens within the tube) x 1.5 ; C, calyx whole and dissected x 1.5 ; D, flower in fruit with corolla and
most of calyx removed x 1.5 ; E, anther x 6. (A, s. coll., Herb. Jard. Bot. Tananarive 3328, P ; B, C, E,
Capuron s.n., Tampolo, S ; D, Perrier de la Bathie 13257, P).
PI. 15. — Distribution maps of Tachiadenus ( O = approximate locality) : A, T. gracilis ; B, T. carinatus ; C,
      T. vohimavensis (•), T. platypterus subsp. platypterus ( • ) and subsp. angustialatus ( • ) ; D, T. longiflo-
     rus ( • ) and T. pervillei ( • ) ; E, T. boivinii (•), T. antaisaka ( • ) and T. umbellatus ( • ) ; F, T. longifo-
     lius (y) and T. tubiflorus (•).
                                                              — 79 —

long petiole, not amplexicaul, acute to acuminate, 3-nerved. Flowers rather many together
in umbel-shaped inflorescences (actually condensed cymes) terminal at branches ; pedicels
rather short, 5-10 m m long, straight. Calyx 12-18 m m long, asymmetric with two narrower
outer and three broader inner lobes ; lobes coalescent 1/5 or less of their length, much
overlapping at base ; outer lobes ± elliptic, tapering at both ends, acute at apex, 4-6 mm
wide ; inner lobes ovate to broadly ovate, one or both sides truncate at base, acute at apex,
8-10 m m wide ; wings absent. Corolla white ; tube 9-16 cm long, with distinct coronula of
callus at mouth of tube ; lobes ovate, 25-45 x 10-17 m m , acute to acuminate. Anthers
3-4 m m long, with large, large-celled appendix at apex and two smaller ones at bases of
thecae. Capsule narrowly ovoid, 25-30 X 8-12 m m , much longer than calyx, with two pro-
truding mid-walls entirely coriaceous.

       DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT : T. tubiflorus is restricted to the northern half of the
eastern coast of Madagascar along the shore. It grows in humid sublittoral forests on
sand. Flowering specimens seen from April, May and August to December.

       NOTES : This species is unique in Tachiadenus in many characters. It has terete stems
totally lacking lines or wings, broad flat unequal calyx lobes and conical anthers furnished
with glands at the end of the connective and at the base of the thecae. Furthermore, it is
the only species with large rounded seeds. It has a distinctly decussate somewhat elongated
umbel-shaped inflorescence.

        HEMSLEY (1898) cited collections of GERRARD, HUMBLOT, BARON and CURTIS under his
T. elatus. I have chosen a sheet of CURTIS in Kew which is the base of the drawing
accompanying the protologue.

      SPECIMENS EXAMINED. — DIEGO-SUAREZ : Forêts sublittorales entre Ambalobe et Ambohitrala-
nana, Antalaha, 1967, Capuron 27756 SF ( P ) ; Distr. Antalaha, Cant. Ambohitralanana, 1953, Silazy
5442 RN ( P ) . — TAMATAVE : Tampolo au N de Fenerive, 1957, Capuron s.n. ( K , P , S) ; Fenerive,
forêt de Tampolo, Debray 1871 ( P ) ; Fenerive Est, 1912, Perrier 9033 ( P ) ; Tampina (Tampani) au S
de Tamatave, 1920, Perrier 13257 (K, P ) ; R.N. 2, Canton Amlohitalanan, Distr. Antalaha, 1953,
Saboureau 5442 RN ( P ) ; Tamatave, environs d'lvoloina, 1937, Herb. Jard. Bot. Tananarive 3328
( P ) ; Soanierana-Ivongo, 1949, Service Eaux Forêts Madagascar 2378 ( P ) .

      INEXACT OR UNIDENTIFIED LOCALITIES : North Madagascar, Baron 6682 (K, P ) ; Madagascar, Cha-
pelier 61 and s.n. ( P , S) ; Madagascar, 1897, Curtis s.n. ( K , P ) ; Distr. de Fenerive, S de la rivière
Azofo, 1909, Geay 8939, 8955, 8957, 9059 ( P ) ; Madagascar, Gerrard ?43 (K) ; Humblot 7 (K, LD, P ,
S) ; S. loc, 1920, Perrier 13257 ( P ) ; Madagascar, Herb. Drake s.n. ( P ) ; Madagascar, Herb. Richard
s.n. ( P ) ; S. loc, Herb, du Petit-Thouars s.n. ( P ) .

EXCLUDED TAXA

       Tachiadenus continentalis Baker (1895 : 70) = Belmontia teuszii Schinz. This species,
though much resembling the genus in habit, is not a Tachiadenus. It has a short and bilo-
cular ovary. It furthermore differs in the morphology of the calyx and by having longer
filaments, an accentuated coronula at the filament bases and a large broad appendix at the
anther apex.

       Tachiadenus mechowianus (Vatke ex Schinz) Hill (1908 : 337) = not Tachiadenus.
The type specimen (Mechow 503 in Zurich) is not a Tachiadenus. It has a short and bilo-
cular ovary as in Exacum, Ornichia and Sebaea, without nerves at the only shortly coales-
                                                             — 80 —

cent calyx lobes as in Sebaea, and the anthers are adhering t o each other by large papillae
along the margins as found in Ornichia.

       Tachiadenus parviflorus Baker (1897 : 274) = Cataranthus lanceus (Bojer) Pichar.

       Tachiadenus trinervis (Desr.) Griseb. (1839 : 201) = Ornichia trinervis (Desr.) Klack.

      ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS : I am grateful to Dr R. HOOGLAND for valuable comments on the manus­
cript and revising the English text. I also want to thank the Director and the Staff of the Labora­
toire de Phanérogamie at the Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle in Paris, where this study has been
performed, for kindly receiving me and providing me with all necessary working facilities. This
research was supported by the Swedish Natural Science Research Council.

                                                           REFERENCES

BAKER, J . G., 1882. — Contributions to the Flora of Central Madagascar. J. Bot. 2 0 ( 1 1 in New
          Series) : 169-173.

BAKER, J . G., 1895. — « 163 Tachiadenus continentalis ». In Diagnoses Africanae 4 . Auct. div. Bull.
         Misc. Inform. 9 , Kew, pp. 63-75 (p.p.).

BAKER, J . G., 1897. — « 520 Tachiadenus parviflorus ». In Diagnoses Africanae 10. Auct. div. Bull.
         Misc. Inform. 1 1 , Kew, pp. 243-300 (p.p.).

BENTHAM, G. & HOCKER, J . D., 1876. — Genera Plantarum 2 ( 2 ) . London.
DESROUSSEAUX, M., 1789. — Lysianthe. In LAMARCK, J . B. DE (ed.), Encyclopédie méthodique. Bota­

         nique 3 . Paris, pp. 658-662.
ELLIOT, G. F. S., 1 8 9 1 . — New and little-known Madagascar Plants. J. Linn. Soc, Bot. 2 9 (197) :

           1-67.

GILG, E., 1895. — Gentianaceae. In ENGLER, A. & PRANTL, K. (eds.), Die naturlichen Pflanzenfami­
         lien 4 (2), Leipzig, pp. 50-180.

GRISEBACH, A. H. R., 1839. — Genera et species Gentianearum. Stuttgart.
GRISEBACH, A. H. R., 1845. — Gentianaceae. In CANDOLLE, A. P. DE, Prodromus systematis natu­

         ralis regni vegetabilis 9, Paris, pp. 3 9 - 1 4 1 .
HEMSLEY, W . B., 1898. — Tachiadenus elatus, Hook. Ic. Pl. 6 ( 3 ) : tab. 2554
HENNIG, W . , 1966. — Phylogenetic systematics. Urbana, Chicago and London.
HILL, A. W . , 1908. — Notes on Sebaea and Exochaenium. Bull. Misc. Inform. 22, Kew, pp. 317-340.
HOLMGREN, P. K., KEUKEN, W . & SCHOFIELD, E., 1 9 8 1 . — Index herbariorum 1. The herbaria of the

         world. Ed. 7 . Regn. Veg. 106 : 1-452.
HUMBERT, H., 1955. — Les territoires phytogéographiques de Madagascar. Année biol., ser. 3 , 3 1 :

           439-448.

HUMBERT, H., 1963. — Les Gentianacées de Madagascar. Adansonia, ser. 2, 3 ( 3 ) : 343-351.
KLACKENBERG, J . , 1985. — The genus Exacum (Gentianaceae). Opera Botánica 8 4 : 1-144.
KLACKENBERG, J . , 1986. — The new genus Ornichia (Gentianaceae) from Madagascar. Bull. Mus.

         natn. Hist, nat., Paris, 4 E sér., 8, sect. B, Adansonia, n° 2 : 195-206.
MARAIS, W . , 1961. — Belmontia and Exochaenium synonymous with Sebaea. In MARAIS, W . & VER-

        DOORN, I . C , Notes and New Records of African Plants, Gentianaceae. Bothalia 7 ( 3 ) :

          458-464.

PFEIFFER, L., 1874. — Nomenciator botanicus 2. Kassel.
ROEMER, J . J . & SCHULTES, J . A., 1819. — Systema Vegetabilium 4 . Stuttgart.
WHITE, F., 1983. — The vegetation of Africa. Paris, Unesco.
                                               Bull. Mus. natn. Hist, nat., Paris, 4 e sér., 9, 1987,
                                                          section B, Adansonia, n° 1 : 81-93.

          Anatomie florale de Meiocarpidium Engler & Diels

                                (Annonaceae- Unoneae)

                                                                           T. DEROIN

             Résumé : L'anatomie florale du genre africain Meiocarpidium Engler & Diels montre que la
             vascularisation réceptaculaire est caractérisée par l'extrême condensation d'un système cortical
             d'origine exclusivement périanthaire, et par l'insertion sur deux niveaux des trente faisceaux
             irriguant l'androcée. La nervation des pièces périanthaires est de type bractéal. L'étamine
             reçoit une seule trace et présente à sa base un dispositif facilitant l'abscission, que l'on peut
             appeler « épaississement abscissial ». Le carpelle non pelté, à cinq traces, montre une vascula-
             risation basale complexe. Les ovules sont irrigués par des traces en apparence issues du fais-
             ceau médian. Cette étude met en évidence les affinités magnoliacéennes de ce genre, et ainsi
             son caractère relativement primitif parmi les Annonaceae. La vascularisation florale de Meio-
             carpidium permet d'autre part de mieux comprendre l'évolution du système cortical annona-
             céen.

             Summary : The floral anatomy of the african monospecific genus Meiocarpidium Engler &
             Diels was studied. The receptacular vasculature is characterized by extreme condensation of
             a cortical system wholly composed of the perianth traces, and by the presence of two levels
             of about fifteen bundles each supplying the androecium. The stamen receives a single trace
             and includes a basal abscission device named by the author : " abscission thickening " . The
             epeltate carpel is a 5-trace structure and shows a complex vasculature at its base. Ovules are
             supplied by traces seemingly branching from the median bundle. This study emphasizes the
             magnoliacean affinities of this genus and consequently, its relative primitiveness among the
            Annonaceae. Moreover the floral vasculature of Meiocarpidium allows a better under-
             standing of the evolution of the annonacean cortical system.

             Thierry Deroin, Laboratoire de Phytomorphologie de TE.P.H.E., Muséum national d'His-
            toire naturelle, 16, rue Buffon, 75005 Paris, France.

       Le genre Meiocarpidium contient u n e seule espèce, M. lepidotum Engler & Diels,
répandue dans les forêts primaires de la Guinée Bissau, du Cameroun et du Gabon
( L E THOMAS, 1969). La morphologie florale externe est caractéristique de celle de la famille :
le périanthe est à trois cycles trimères, les sépales sont réduits ( 5 mm de longueur environ),
tandis que les pétales sont à peu près quatre à cinq fois plus grands, et présentent tous une
même forme ovale à sommet aigu. Les étamines trapues, très nombreuses, à déhiscence
extrorse, forment un androcée cyclique compact. Les carpelles sont peu nombreux (3 à 5
d'après FRIES, 1958 ; nombre de 4 toujours observé). Les pièces florales s'insèrent sur un
réceptacle hémisphérique. Le pollen, hétéropolaire monosulqué, à structure grenue peu dif-
férenciée, représente un type considéré comme primitif dans la famille (LE THOMAS, 1 9 8 1 ,

1984) et à l'intérieur des Magnoliales (WALKER & SKVARLA, 1975).

      Jusqu'à présent, la vascularisation florale de très peu de genres d'Annonacées a été
                                                                           — 82 —

observée (SMITH, 1928 ; OZENDA, 1949 ; COLEMAN, 1966 ; KRAMER, 1969). Pour comprendre

la variation structurale de la fleur, et son évolution, il est indispensable d'élargir ces études
à u n plus grand nombre de genres. Chez Meiocarpidium, on a pu déceler en effet des carac-
tères originaux permettant d'argumenter sa position systématique et de présenter un modèle
d'évolution vasculaire montrant un lien avec les Magnoliaceae.

MATÉRIEL ET MÉTHODES

      Les 9 fleurs étudiées (fixateur : F.A.A.) ont été récoltées au Cameroun par J.-F. VILLIERS (J.-F. Vil-
liers 633, P) au bord de la rivière Bango près de Moloundou (environ 2° N , 15°44' E). Deux fleurs
ont été incluses dans la paraffine (Pf : 70° C), coupées à 10 /*m d'épaisseur et colorées par la combi-
naison : safranine, violet cristal, vert lumière (GERLACH, 1984). Les autres fleurs ont été coupées à la
main. Les sections sériées obtenues ont été éclaircies par le chlorallactophénol, puis montées à la glycé-
rine gélatinée, et ont servi à étudier la vascularisation du réceptacle. La nervation des pièces périan-
thaires a été observée sur une fleur de l'Herbier du Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle de Paris
(Zenker 3027, Cameroun, P), éclaircie par le chlorallactophénol. Les préparations obtenues sont con-
servées au Laboratoire de Phytomorphologie de l'E.P.H.E., au Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle
de Paris, sous les numéros : CT 8, CT 41, CM 4, CM 5, CM 8, CM 14, CM 15, CM 16 et CM 17.
Les dessins ont été exécutés à la chambre claire.

OBSERVATIONS

        VASCULARISATION DU RÉCEPTACLE

       Le pédicelle floral contient un cylindre central formé d'une quarantaine de faisceaux
libéro-ligneux. Huit faisceaux corticaux (Fc) — nombre constant pour sept fleurs observées
en coupe transversale — présentant une structure vasicentrique ou superposée s'en détachent
(Pl. 1, 7 ) . Ils se fragmentent très vite dans l'écorce, formant une couronne irrégulière qui
double la stèle (Pl. 1, 2-4) et constitue un véritable système cortical (Se). Celui-ci irrigue les
pièces périanthaires.

       Les sépales possèdent trois traces : on peut y reconnaître les latéraux (ls), soudés dans
le pédicelle, et les médians (ms), plus ou moins individualisés (Pl. 1 , 4-7). Au-dessus, la vas-
cularisation des pétales est extrêmement confuse ( P l . 1, 8-11) et le nombre des traces de
chaque pièce ne peut être rigoureusement défini. Après le départ des pétales internes le
système cortical s'épuise en émettant de minces faisceaux périphériques corticaux (Pl. 1,
11, a n ) .

       Au niveau de l'insertion des pétales une seconde couronne, constituée d'une quinzaine
de faisceaux (Ts : « troncs staminaux ») émet des ramifications vers les étamines (Pl. 1 , 9-
12, Ts 1 , E ) . Au-dessus, une troisième couronne de faisceaux se détache de la stèle, simi-
laire à la précédente par sa constitution et son rôle (Pl. 1, 12 ; 2, 1-3, Ts 2 ) . Les troncs sta-
minaux forment un réseau périphérique où s'insèrent les traces staminales. Au sommet du
réceptacle, peu avant le départ de la vascularisation carpellaire, ce réseau se raccorde à la
stèle par de minces anastomoses (Pl. 2 , 4-6, a n ) .

       Une coupe longitudinale de la fleur résume l'ensemble de cette description (Pl. 2 , 7).

       Ainsi, la vascularisation du réceptacle paraît constituée d'une superposition de quatre
systèmes vasculaires fondamentalement indépendants, mais reliés par des anastomoses péri-
phériques :
                                                              — 83 —

— la stèle centrale qui n'irrigue « directement » que le gynécée ;
— deux couronnes équivalentes de faisceaux qui desservent l'androcée ;
— le système cortical qui n'alimente que les pièces périanthaires.

1. — Vascularisation du réceptacle floral de Meiocarpidium lepidotum. (an, anastomose • E étamine • Fc

ceaux corticaux ; ls, latéraux sépalaires ; Se, système cortical ; Ts, tronc staminal). ' '  ''
                                                             — 84 —

pi 2 — Vascularisation du réceptacle floral de Meiocarpidium lepidotum (suite), (an, anastomose ; C, carpelle ;
      È, étamine ; EA, épaississement abscissial ; Fc, faisceau cortical ; ls, latéraux sépalaires ; mpe, median du
      pétale externe ; Ts, tronc staminal).
        NERVATION DU PÉRIANTHE

       Malgré les différences de taille des sépales et des pétales, ceux-ci présentent une nerva-
tion fondamentalement identique. Les faisceaux principaux sont quasi-parallèles, au nombre
de sept pour les sépales (Pl. 3, 7), huit ou neuf pour les pétales externes et internes (Pl. 3,
2, 3), équivalents à la limite supérieure du nombre de traces.
                                                                — 85 —

 Pl. 3. — Nervation des pièces périanthaires de Meiocarpidium lepidotum : 1, sépale ; 2, pétale externe ; 3, pétale
       interne.

        La nervation secondaire est dense. L'ensemble de la vascularisation est fermé (arcs mar-
 ginaux continus). D'après la terminologie définie par DAUMANN et al. (1970), la nervation
 des pièces périanthaires correspond à la structure « fasciculatio vasorum flabellata clausa »
(vascularisation flabellée fermée).

        HISTOLOGIE DE L'ÉTAMINE

       L'étamine présente à son point d'attache sur le réceptacle une structure particulière.
Celle-ci revêt la forme d'un ellipsoïde aplati dans le plan d'insertion, dont les principaux
axes mesurent approximativement 300 x 400 x 600 /an. Elle est toujours en position
abaxiale par rapport au faisceau staminal (Pl. 4, 1). Cette structure montre deux types cel-
lulaires : des petites cellules (PC) très chromophiles formant un tissu compact semblable à
celui de la zone d'abscission normale, et de grandes cellules sécrétrices (CS), comme on en
retrouve dans toutes les parties florales (Pl. 4, 2). Cette structure représente clairement un
renflement local de la zone d'abscission normale. A un stade floral plus avancé, lés petites
cellules se lysent, libérant des cristaux d'oxalate de calcium en oursins (Pl. 4, 3).

       Une coupe tranversale à la base des loges polliniques d'une étamine proche de la déhis-
cence permet d'observer une histologie diversifiée (Pl. 4, 4). O n trouve de l'extérieur vers
l'intérieur : un épiderme très cutinisé, continu sur les loges (Pl. 4, 5) ; un sclérenchyme
hypodermique constitué de deux à trois strates cellulaires, en continuité avec la strate unique
de l'assise mécanique des loges. L'assise tapélale comprend trois à quatre couches de cel-
lules. Le connectif très développé contient un parenchyme à cellules sécrétrices et scléreuses
dispersées. Une région en croissant plus ou moins collenchymateuse entoure le faisceau stami-
nal unique, amphicribral, qui se ramifie de manière dichotomique au sommet du connectif.
                                                                             — 86 —

Pl. 4. — Histologie de l'étamine de Meiocarpidium lepidotum : 1, épaississement abscissial en coupe longitudi-
      nale ; 2, épaississement abscissial en coupe transversale ; 3, cristaux d'oxalate de calcium dans un épaississe-
      ment âgé (écrasement) ; 4, coupe transversale de l'étamine à la base des loges polliniques ; 5, détail du sto-
      mium, noter l'épiderme très cutinisé (CS, cellule sécrétrice ; FR, faisceau réceptaculaire ; FS, faisceau stami-
      nal ; EA, épaississement abscissial ; PC, parenchyme cristalligène à petites cellules ; PE, parenchyme stami-
      nal ; SC, amas scléreux ; ZI, zone abscissiale intermédiaire normale).
                                                                              — 87 —

Pl. 5. — Vascularisation du carpelle de Meiocarpidium lepidotum : 1-14, coupes transversales ascendantes du
      carpelle ; 15, reconstitution avec indication des niveaux de sections (à droite sur la figure). (Aa, arc vasculaire
      accessoire, représenté en noir sur la fig. 15 ; Fo, trace ovulaire ; Fp, faisceau placentaire ; L, faisceau latéral ;
      Le, faisceau latéral externe ; M, faisceau médian).
                                                                            — 88 —

        VASCULARISATION CARPELLAIRE

      Au sommet du réceptacle (Pl. 2 , 6), la stèle constitue une couronne de petits faisceaux
très nombreux et forme quatre lobes correspondant aux quatre carpelles observés. A l'inser-
tion du carpelle, chacun de ces lobes (Pl. 5 , /) montre un arc vasculaire accessoire externe
(Pl. 5 , 2 , Aa). Cet arc émet des ramifications irrégulières verticales et obliques, tandis que
le faisceau médian s'individualise (Pl. 5 , 3, M). Puis la vascularisation carpellaire s'isole de
celle des autres lobes (Pl. 5 , 4, 5), toute la stèle sommitale irriguant les carpelles.

       Lorsque la cavité ovarienne se dessine, elle est en continuité avec l'extérieur par deux
stèles épidermiques soudées et les faisceaux latéraux s'individualisent (Pl. 5 , 6, Ml, L). On
peut encore distinguer des latéraux (L) et des médiolatéraux (Ml) qui se soudent très rapide-
ment au médian (Pl. 5 , 7, 8). Les latéraux (L) fournissent une ramification externe (Le), se
dédoublent, puis forment des boutonnières (Pl. 5 , 7-10, 15), après avoir émis une trace qui
irrigue la marge placentaire (Pl. 5 , 8, F p ) . Les ramifications de l'arc accessoire externe (Aa)
fusionnent partiellement avec les médiolatéraux, et disparaissent au niveau où s'insèrent les
deux premiers ovules.

      Les ovules, au nombre d'une douzaine, alternent régulièrement le long de la soudure
carpellaire et sont irrigués par des branches (Fo) apparemment issues du faisceau médian
(Pl. 5 , 9-13). Les faisceaux latéraux et latéraux externes réduits à leur partie libérienne,
commencent à s'effacer au niveau de l'insertion de l'ovule supérieur (Pl. 5 , 13). Ils ne se
prolongent pas dans le stigmate. Par contre, le faisceau médian se divise et chaque moitié
irrigue l'un des deux lobes stigmatiques (Pl. 5 , 14, M l et M 2 ) . Les stigmates des quatre car-
pelles ne se soudent pas en plateau stigmatique commun, mais restent indépendants.

DISCUSSION

        VASCULARISATION DU RÉCEPTACLE

       La comparaison des résultats obtenus avec ceux publiés sur Annona cherimolia (OZENDA,
1 9 4 9 ) , Asimina triloba (SMITH, 1 9 2 8 ) , Rollinia (COLEMAN, 1 9 6 6 ) et la tribu des Xylopieae
(KRAMER, 1969), permet de constater qu'en dehors des caractères communs, le réceptacle de
Meiocarpidium possède des structures particulières.

       Ainsi, comme chez les autres Annonaceae étudiées, il y a trois traces sépalaires et les
traces latérales des sépales adjacents sont soudées ; le nombre de traces pétalaires est indis-
tinct ; enfin un système vasculaire cortical double la stèle centrale et se raccorde par anasto-
moses à l'extrême base du gynécée.

      En revanche, la vascularisation des pétales dérive entièrement du système cortical, alors
que dans les autres Annonaceae connues les traces médianes sont issues de la stèle centrale
et le système cortical n'émet que les latérales (Pl. 6 , la, lb). D'autre part, chez Meiocarpi-
dium, le système cortical est construit par la fusion des seules périanthaires, tandis qu'il
incorpore partiellement les traces staminales chez Asimina triloba, et totalement chez
Annona cherimolia, Rollinia et les Xylopieae (Pl. 6 , 3-5). L a vascularisation indépendante
                                                             — 89 —

Pl. 6 . — Schémas interprétatifs de la vascularisation réceptaculaire des Annonaceae : 1, vascularisation des
      pétales ; a, entièrement émise par le système cortical (Meiocarpidium) ; b, le système cortical ne fournit que
      les latéraux (cas probablement plus général) ; 2-5, vascularisations florales en coupes longitudinales (très sché-
      matisées) ; 2 , Magnolia grandiflora (d'après SKVORTSOVA, 1958) ; 3 , Meiocarpidium lepidotum ; 4 , Asimina

       triloba (d'après SMITH, 1928) ; 5 , Rollinia emarginata (d'après COLEMAN, 1966).

du périanthe et de l'androcée dans le réceptacle de Meiocarpidium apparaît être u n caractère
original qui n'avait pas encore été souligné chez les Annonaceae mais qui pourrait être éga-
lement présent chez Piptostigma (étude en cours).

      Cette organisation est très comparable à celle de Magnolia grandiflora (SKVORTSOVA,
1958) où les traces périanthaires sont totalement issues d'un système cortical et les médians
des étamines également rattachés à des troncs vasculaires communs (Pl. 6, 2) issus de la
stèle centrale. Cependant, chez Magnolia, on note qu'il existe des latéraux staminaux (éta-
                                                                              — 90 —

mines à trois traces) provenant du système cortical, que la vascularisation est encore plus
condensée (une couronne vasculaire unique) et qu'elle se prolonge en émettant les latéraux
carpellaires (Pl. 6 , 2).

       On voit donc que les vascularisations réceptaculaires de Meiocarpidium et de Magnolia
sont construites sur un plan très semblables, les anastomoses entre le périanthe et l'andro-
cée de Meiocarpidium pouvant alors être interprétées comme les vestiges des traces latérales
staminales et celles qui existent entre l'androcée et le gynécée, comme relictes des traces
latérales carpellaires (Pl. 6 , 2, 3).

         LES PIÈCES FLORALES

       Les pièces périanthaires ont une nervation semblable qui traduit leur véritable homolo-
gie et confirme les conclusions de HIEPKO ( 1 9 6 5 ) pour lequel elles sont toujours d'origine
bractéale chez les Magnoliales.

       L'étamine de Meiocarpidium présente une histologie complexe très proche de celle de
certaines Magnoliaceae, en particulier Michelia, qui ne comporte q u ' u n e seule trace et où il
y a également continuité de l'assise mécanique et d'un sclérenchyme hypodermique (CAN-
RIGHT, 1 9 5 2 ) . L'homologie de ces deux tissus pourrait être appuyée par l'existence d'une
assise mécanique continue autour de l'étamine de Magnolia grandiflora (SKVORTSOVA, 1 9 5 8 ) .

       La structure particulière décrite à la base de l'étamine de Meiocarpidium, paraît bien
avoir pour fonction de favoriser son abscission, puisqu'elle constitue un point de rupture
qui la rend très fragile, après la lyse de ses cellules. On sait en effet que l'abscission des éta-
mines joue un rôle considérable dans la pollinisation des Annonaceae (GOTTSBERGER, 1 9 7 0 )
où le pollen n'est accessible aux agents pollinisateurs qu'au moment où l'androcée se disso-
cie. Mais, j u s q u ' à présent, aucun dispositif du type de celui de Meiocarpidium n'avait été
observé chez les Annonaceae (ENDRESS, 1 9 8 5 ) , alors q u ' o n le retrouve également dans un
autre genre africain : Piptostigma fasciculata (De Wild.) Boutique (étude en cours). Cette
structure particulière représentant un renflement de la zone abscissiale normale pourrait être
désignée par le terme « épaississement abscissial ». Sa localisation contre le faisceau stami-
nal et l'accumulation d'oxalate de calcium dans ses cellules permet également d'envisager
d'autres fonctions, qui pourraient être liées au métabolisme floral. Seules des études physio-
logiques pourront éclaircir ce point.

       Les carpelles, très peu nombreux, ne montrent aucune trace de peltation comme chez la
plupart des Annonaceae (LEINFELLNER, 1 9 6 9 ) . On peut ainsi les rapprocher des carpelles du
groupe « Eupomatiaceae — Himantandraceae — Magnoliaceae » (ENDRESS, 1 9 7 7 ) . Leur
vascularisation basale complexe (arc vasculaire externe, « boutonnières ») pourrait être en
liaison avec la disparition des faisceaux corticaux fournissant les latéraux carpellaires (Pl. 6 ,
2, 3). Il semble s'individualiser cinq faisceaux que l'on peut considérer comme traces. Les
traces ovulaires dérivent du faisceau médian comme chez quelques autres Annonaceae :
Cananga odorata (PERIASAMY & SWAMY, 1 9 5 6 ) , Isolona campanulata et Monodora brevipes
(DEROIN, 1 9 8 5 ) , Saccopetalum tomentosum (SASTRI, 1 9 5 7 ) , ainsi que chez certaines Magno-
liaceae comme Liriodendron (CANRIGHT, 1 9 6 0 ) . P a r contre, chez Asimina triloba (SMITH,
1 9 2 8 ) et Rollinia emarginata (COLEMAN, 1 9 6 6 ) , elles proviennent des faisceaux latéraux. Il
existe également des cas mixtes (traces ovulaires de double origine latérale et médiane) qui
concernent certaines espèces des genres Annona, Artabotrys, Goniothalamus, Polyalthia et
                                                                             — 91 —

Uvaria (SASTRI, 1 9 5 7 , 1 9 5 9 ) . Il convient cependant de ne pas opposer de façon trop absolue
ces divers modes de vascularisation ovulaire. P a r exemple, dans le fruit de Cananga odorata
la graine est irriguée suivant le mode mixte (observation personnelle), alors que dans la
fleur seule la trace ovulaire issue du médian est différenciée (PERIASAMY & SWAMY, 1956).
D'autre part, il existe entre le médian et les latéraux carpellaires tout un réseau complexe
d'anastomoses. Un tel réseau est également présent chez Austrobaileya et les traces ovulaires
qui s'y insèrent directement ne sont alors ni d'origine latérale, ni d'origine médiane
(ENDRESS, 1 9 8 0 et communication personnelle). Il faut donc tenir compte du degré de diffé-
renciation de la vascularisation et de l'existence d'intermédiaires entre les modes d'irrigation
ovulaire.

CONCLUSIONS

      L'étude anatomique de la fleur de Meiocarpidium permet de mettre en évidence un
nouveau type de construction du système cortical annonacéen, particulièrement peu déve-
loppé et se rapprochant donc d'une organisation de Magnoliaceae. D ' u n autre côté, sa fai-
ble extension permet de comprendre la structure des autres systèmes corticaux annonacéens
qui aurait pu être acquise au cours de l'évolution, d'une part par la disparition progressive
des faisceaux latéraux carpellaires et staminaux, d'autre part par la concrescence des fais-
ceaux staminaux entre eux et avec les faisceaux périanthaires, conduisant au déplacement
des troncs staminaux en périphérie du réceptacle (cf. Rollinia, P l . 6 , 5 ) . En ce sens, o n ne
peut donc dire que le système cortical des Annonaceae soit moins développé que celui des

Magnoliaceae ( E A M E S , 1 9 6 1 ) .

       La faible condensation de la vascularisation florale de Meiocarpidium (irrigation sépa-
rée de l'androcée et du périanthe) se retrouve également chez Piptostigma fasciculata où elle
est aussi associée à la présence de l'épaississement abscissial. Ces caractères viennent ainsi
corroborer les résultats palynologiques (LE THOMAS, 1 9 8 1 ) qui ont permis de rapprocher
étroitement ces deux genres africains et de les regrouper dans une même tribu (HESSE et al.,

1985).

      En outre, si l'on admet que les concrescences vasculaires sont irréversibles dans une
telle série anatomique, le système cortical simple de Meiocarpidium apparaît comme primitif
par rapport à ceux plus complexes à'Asimina ou de Rollinia. O n ne peut donc pas parler,
chez les Annonaceae, de structure en voie de réduction (OZENDA, 1 9 4 9 ) .

      Ainsi, la structure du système cortical de Meiocarpidium permet d'établir une série évo-
lutive continue entre le modèle magnoliacéen et ceux rencontrés chez les Annonaceae.

      REMERCIEMENTS : Je remercie particulièrement M. le Professeur P. MORAT qui m'a autorisé à étu-
dier les échantillons de l'Herbier du Muséum de Paris ainsi que M m e LE THOMAS qui m'a communiqué
les fleurs en F.A.A. et m'a conseillé pour la rédaction de ce travail. Je remercie également MM. P. K.
ENDRESS (Zurich) et D . BARABÉ (Montréal) qui ont bien voulu relire cet article et me faire part de
leurs remarques, ainsi que M. R . HOOGLAND qui a accepté de corriger le résumé en anglais.
                                                                            — 92 —

                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHIE

CANRIGHT, J . E., 1952. — The comparative morphology and relationships of the Magnoliaceae.
         I — Trends of specialization in the stamens. Amer. J. Bot. 39 : 484-497.

CANRIGHT, J . E., 1960. — The comparative morphology and relationships of the Magnoliaceae.
         Ill — Carpels. Amer. J. Bot. 47 : 145-155.

COLEMAN, M., 1966. — Floral anatomy and morphology of Rollinia St. Hil. Arg. Bot. Est. Sao
         Paulo IV (2) : 45-51.

DAUMANN, E., CHRTEK, J . , JIRASEK, V. & SLAVIKOVA, S., 1970. — Navrh terminologie pro usporadani

         cévnich svazku v korunnich listcich dvoudeloznych (résumé en allemand : Terminologie der
         Leitbündelanordnung in den Kronblättern der Dicotyledonen). Preslia 42 : 304-316.
DEROIN, T., 1985. — Contribution à la morphologie comparée du gynécée des Annonaceae-Monodo-
         roideae. Bull. Mus. natn. Hist, nat., Paris, 4 e sér., 7, section B, Adansonia, n° 2 : 167-176.
EAMES, A. J . , 1961. — Morphology of the Angiosperms. Mac Graw-Hill, New York.
ENDRESS, P . K., 1977. — Ueber Blütenbau und Verwandschaft der Eupomatiaceae und Himantandra-
         ceae (Magnoliales). Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges. 90 : 83-103.
ENDRESS, P. K., 1980. — The reproductive structures and systematic position of the Austrobaileya-
         ceae. Bot. Jahrb. 101 : 393-433.
ENDRESS, P. K., 1985. — Stamenabszission und Pollenpräsentation bei Annonaceae. Flora 176 : 95-
         98.
FRIES, R. E., 1958. — Annonaceae. Nat. Pflanzenf, ed. 2, 17a, 2 : 1-171.
GERLACH, D., 1984. — Botanische Mikrotechnik, 3 e éd. Thieme, Stuttgart.
GOTTSBERGER, G., 1970. — Beiträge zur Biologie von Annonaceae-Blüten. Oesterr. Bot. Z . 118 : 237-
         279.
HESSE, M., MORAWETZ, W . & EHRENDORFER, F., 1985. — Pollen Ultrastructure and Systematic Affi-
         nities of Anaxagorea (Annonaceae). PI. Syst. Evol. 148 : 253-285.
HIEPKO, P., 1965. — Vergleichend-morphologische und entwicklungsgeschichtliche Untersuchungen
         über das Perianth bei den Polycarpicae. Bot. Jahrb. 84 : 427-508.
KRAMER, D. W . , 1969. — Comparative anatomical studies in the Annonaceae-Xylopieae. Thèse,
         Indiana, 135 p.
LEINFELLNER, W . , 1969. — Ueber die Karpelle verschiedener Magnoliales. VIII — Ueberblick über alle
         Familien der Ordnung. Oesterr. Bot. Z. 117 : 107-127.
LE THOMAS, A., 1969. — Annonacées. Flore du Gabon 16, 369 p.
LE THOMAS, A., 1980-1981. — Ultrastructural characters of the pollen grains of the african Annona-
         ceae and their significance for the phylogeny of primitive angiosperms. Pollen et Spores 22
         (3-4) : 267-342 ; 23 (1) : 5-36.
LE THOMAS, A., 1984. — Evidences palynologiques sur l'origine des Annonaceae (Magnoliales). Revue
        de Paléobiologie, Genève, vol. spécial d'avril : 119-124.
OZENDA, P . , 1949. — Recherches sur les Dicotylédones apocarpiques. Masson, Paris, 183 p.
PERIASAMY, K. & SWAMY, В . , 1956. — The conduplicate carpel of Cananga odorata. Journ. Arnold
        Arbor. 37 : 366-372.
SASTRI, R. N., 1957. — The vascularization of the ovules in Saccopetalum tomentosum. Curr. Se. 26 :
         183.
SASTRI, R. N., 1959. — The vascularization of the carpel in some ranales. New Phytol. 58 : 306-309.
                                                                            — 93 —

SKVORTSOVA, N. T., 1958. — K anatomii cvetka Magnolia grandiflora L. (Anatomie florale de M.
        grandiflora, en russe). Bot. Zurn. (Moscou). 43 : 401-408.

SMITH, G. H., 1928. — Vascular anatomy of ranalian flowers. II — Ranunculaceae (cont.), Meni-
         spermaceae, Calycanthaceae, Annonaceae. Bot. Gaz. 85 : 152-177.

WALKER, J . W . & SKVARLA, J . J . , 1975. — Primitively columelless pollen : a new concept in the
         evolutionary morphology of angiosperms. Science 187 : 445-447.
Bull. Mus. natn. Hist, nat., Paris, 4" sér., 9, 1987,
          section B, Adansonìa, n° 1 : 95-100.

Two new species of Nesogordonia                                {Sterculiaceae)
                       from Madagascar

                                               L. C . BARNETT

Summary : Nesogordonia abrahamii L. Barnett and N. pachynema Capuron ex L. Barnett
(Sterculiaceae) are described from Madagascar.

Résumé : Nesogordonia abrahamii L. Barnett et N. pachynema Capuron ex L. Barnett
(Sterculiaceae) sont décrits de Madagascar.

Lisa C. Barnett, Department of Botany, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78713-
7640, U.S.A.

       The genus Nesogordonia Bâillon (Sterculiaceae) comprises eighteen species of forest
trees of the Old World tropics. Fifteen species, of which two are described here, are ende-
mic to Madagascar. African species were known originally under the name Cistanthera
Schumann until CAPURON (1952) recognized that Cistanthera was indistinguishable from the
Malagasy genus Nesogordonia. All Nesogordonia species are recognized readily by their
fruit : a turbinate, woody, loculicidal capsule bearing winged seeds. The characteristic
fruit and seed morphologies have been the principal basis for associating Nesogordonia with
the Helmiopsideae Arènes, a tribe consisting of two other genera, Helmiopsis Perrier (8 spe-
cies) and Helmiopsiella Arènes (4 species), both of which are restricted to
Madagascar. Species of Nesogordonia are distinguished from the other members of the
Helmiopsideae by several features, including fleshy petals and staminodes ; laminar stamens
in five separate fascicles that are free from the staminodes ; subapical placentae ; five con-
nate styles ; stigmas fleshy and conical with a recurved stigmatic surface ; seeds with infe-
rior wings ; entire, conduplicate cotyledons ; and reticulate pollen.

       Herbarium studies at the Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris (P), and the
Herbier des Eaux et Forêts in Antananarivo, Madagascar (TEF), allowed the author to dis-
cover material of two new species of Nesogordonia while preparing a m o n o g r a p h of the
genus.

      Nesogordonia abrahamii L. Barnett, sp. nov.

     Arbor foliis obovatis, 1.5-5 cm longis, 1.3-3 cm latis, domatiis axillaribus ; inflorescentiis 1-2-flo-
ribus ; petalis 13-15 mm longis, 8-10 mm latis ; staminibus fertilibus 20, staminibus exterius 15 in fasci-
culis 5 dispositis, staminibus interior 5 liberis, staminodiis nullis.

      TYPE : Service Forestier 26864 SF (nolo-, P ; iso-, T E F ) .
                                                              — 96 —

       Tree 10-15 m tall with straight, narrow bole ; young shoots tan, finely striate, densely
stellate-pubescent, in age twigs glabrate, gray, bark wrinkled and knobby with prominent
leaf scars. Leaves obovate, 1.7-4.8 cm long, 1.3-3 cm wide, base rounded, apex mucronate
and truncate to retuse, margins entire, slightly undulate and revolute toward the apex, mid-
vein and secondary veins raised below, lower surface of blades densely golden-brown
stellate-pubescent, bearing domatia of long-armed stellate hairs in the axils of midrib and
secondary veins, upper surface of blades sparsely stellate-pubescent. Petioles 3-7 mm long,
stellate-pubescent. Stipules fugacious.

       Inflorescences axillary, 1-2-flowered ; peduncles 20-35 mm long, densely stellate-
pubescent, articulated 2-8 mm below the flower. Floral buds ovate, 13-14 mm long,
8-9 mm wide, densely stellate-pubescent. Calyx 5-lobed, united only at the base, lobes
narrowly-elliptic, 13-17 mm long, 8-10 mm wide. Petals 5, obovate, 13-15 mm long,
8-10 m m wide. Stamens 20, external stamens 15 in fascicles of 3, internal stamens 5, free,
laminar, 9-12 mm long ; anthers linear, 7-9 mm long. Pistil tomentose ; ovary 5-costulate,
2-3 mm tall, 3-4 m m wide ; styles 5, connate, 2-3 mm long ; stigma lobes 5, fleshy,
2-3.5 mm long.

       Capsules woody, brown, densely stellate-pubescent, obconic, costulate toward the base,
35-46 mm long, 20-30 mm wide ; apex deeply concave, rim raised, either indistinct and
rounded or well-defined and angular. Seeds 7-11 x 4-5 m m , seed-wings 12-20 x 8-9 m m .

      Nesogordonia abrahamii is unusual in bearing an internal whorl of 5 fertile stamens
rather than an internal ring of 5 staminodes. Although this internal fertile whorl is a fea­
ture of only two other Nesogordonia species, N. fertilis Perrier and N. ambalabeensis Are-
nes, this fact should not be interpreted as evidence of close relationship among these three
taxa.

      Nesogordonia abrahamii seems to be most closely related to N. thouarsii (Baillon)
Capuron. The two species share prominent and evenly-parallel secondary venation ; very
conspicuous domatia ; short, stout petioles ; large flowers with ovate, coriaceous petals ;
wrinkled, knobby, or gnarled bark on the twigs ; flowers solitary or paired ; and a varia­
ble capsule morphology that is, in general, concave at the apex with a raised and usually
rounded rim. Nesogordonia abrahamii differs primarily in its much smaller leaves, absence
of staminodes, and well-developed seed wing. (The seed wing of N. thouarsii is reduced,
presumably an adaptation to water dispersal in the seasonally-flooded habitat of this spe­
cies.)

      Nesogordonia abrahamii had remained undescribed largely because it bears a superficial
resemblance to N. normandii C a p u r o n in terms of leaf size, shape, and pubescence, and has
been consistently confused with that species. Nesogordonia abrahamii, N. normandii, and
N. thouarsii can be differentiated readily on the basis of the characters listed in Table 1.

      Nesogordonia abrahamii is restricted largely to moist, tropical forest of central-eastern
Madagascar at approximately 1,000 m elevation, along the escarpment between the central
plateau and the eastern coast.

       The specific epithet honors Jean-Prosper ABRAHAM, a botanist whose field expertise has
contributed significantly to the knowledge of Malagasy plants.
                                                                                    97 —

Pl. 1. — Nesogordonia abrahamii L. Barnett : 1, twig ; 2, floral bud ; 3, flower at anthesis ; 4, fascicle of 3
      outer stamens ; 5, inner stamen ; 6, gynoecium ; 7, capsule. (1, Service Forestier 20-B R-172, P ; 2-6, Service
     Forestier 26864 SF, TEF ; 7, Service Forestier 26838 SF, P).
       Common names for this species are generalized. However, the following names have

been reported by various collectors : F a n o n d a m b o (Randriamanga 139 ; Service Forestier
26838 SF, 26864 SF, 26865 SF, 26924 SF, 26947 SF) ; Mantaly (Goyeniche 115-R-77) ;
Menavahatra- « red shrub » (Service Forestier 29-R-212) ; Tavia- « tree » (Service Forestier
20-B R-172, 53-B R-172).
                                           — 98 —

TABLE i : Characters distinguishing three species of Nesogordonia.

                         N. abrahamii          N. normanda            N. thouarsa

TWIGS            gray with wrinkled or     brown with smooth bark brown to gray with wrin-
                 knobby bark                                                   kled or knobby bark
LEAF SIZE        1.7-5 x 1.3-3 cm
LEAF APEX        truncate and flat to re-  2.4-5 x 1-2.5 cm  11-20 x 4-7 cm
                 fuse
DOMATIA          in 1° and 2° vein axils   rounded           obtuse to rounded
                 only
PETIOLE LENGTH                             in 1° and 2° and some- in 1° and 2° and some-
INFLORESCENCE    3-7 mm
FLOWER BUD SIZE  1-2-flowered              times also in 2° and 3° times also in 2° and 3°
STAMEN NUMBER    13-14 x 8-9 mm
STAMINODES       20                        vein axils        vein axils
SEED WING        absent
                 present                   10-22 mm          15-20 mm

                                           3-8-flowered      1-2-flowered

                                           6-8 x 3-4 mm      15-20 x 10-13 mm

                                           10                15-20

                                           present           present

                                           present           absent

      MATERIAL EXAMINED : Capuron 24020 SF, Forêt d'Analamazaotra, Permet, 1.3.1965 (P) ; Goyeni-
che 115-R-77, Andriantantely, Canton Lohariandava, District Brickaville, 17.6.1954 (P) ; Randria-
manga 139, Lohan'i Sahatenany au Nord de Beanana, 3.2.1952 (P) ; Service Forestier 4-B R-172,
Sahamaloto, Périnet, 8.2.1951 (TEF) ; Service Forestier 20-B R-172, Sahamaloto, 22.6.1951 (P) ; Ser-
vice Forestier 29-R-212, Sandrangato-Moramanga, 6.11.1950 (TEF); Service Forestier 53-B R-172,
Sahamaloto, Périnet, 23.10.1950 (TEF) ; Service Forestier 7040 SF, Sandromagoto-Moramanga, s.d.
(TEF) ; Service Forestier 26838 SF, Antetezampandrana, P.K. 27-28 route Moramanga-Anosibe,
10.1.1969 (P, TEF) ; Service Forestier 26864 SF, Rte Anosibe-Moramanga, 5.1969 (P, TEF) ; Service
Forestier 26865 SF, Rte Anosibe-Moramanga, ait. 950-1000 m, 14.5.1969 (P, TEF) ; Service Forestier
26924 SF, Nangaranana, Canton Marovoay, District Moramanga, 1.1970 (P, TEF) ; Service Forestier
26947 SF, Nangaranana, Canton Marovoay, District Moramanga, 2.1970 (P, TEF).

       Nesogordonia pachyneura C a p u r o n ex L. Barnett, sp. nov.

      Arbor, foliis obovatis vel oblanceolatis, 2.3-5 cm longis, 1-2 cm latís, costa crassissima; inflores-
centiis 1-2-floribus ; petalis ca. 11 mm longis, 1-2 mm latis ; staminibus fertilibus 20, in fasciculis 5
dispositis, staminodiis 5.

      TYPE : Capuron 24535 SF (holo-, P ; iso-, T E F ) .

      Tree 7-18 m, trunk diameter to 40 cm ; young shoots tan, densely stellate-pubescent,
glabrate with age, older twigs tan to gray, bark striate to wrinkled. Leaves obovate to
oblanceolate, 2.3-5 cm long, 1-1.7 cm wide, base attenuate, apex mucronulate, truncate and
retuse or obtuse or rounded, margins entire to slightly undulate and slightly revolute, mid-
vein thickened and very prominently raised below, slightly raised above, lower surface of
blades glabrate or stellate-pubescent, especially in the axils of the midvein and secondary
veins, upper surface of blades glabrate. Petioles 3-8 mm long, minutely stellate-pubescent
to glabrate. Stipules narrowly triangular, ca. 3 mm long, fugacious.
                                                              — 99 —
       Inflorescences axillary, 1-2-flowered ; peduncle 16-21 mm long, finely stellate-
pubescent ; pedicel 6-9 mm long, finely stellate-pubescent, articulated ca. 2 mm below the
flower. Floral buds ovate, 8-9 m m long, ca. 3 m m wide, densely stellate-pubescent. Calyx
5-lobed, united only at the base, lobes narrowly elliptic, ca. 11-12 m m long, 1-2 m m wide,
outer surfaces densely pubescent, inner surfaces sparsely pubescent, lobes spreading or
reflexed at anthesis. Petals 5, yellow, narrowly elliptic, ca. 1 1 m m long, 1-2 m m
wide. Stamens 20, in fascicles of 4, laminar, 7-10 m m long ; anthers linear, 5-7 m m long ;
staminodes 5, linear and geniculate, ca. 12 m m long. Pistil tomentose ; ovary 5-costulate,
ca. 1.5 m m tall, 1.5 m m wide ; styles 5, connate, 3-4 m m long ; stigma lobes 5, fleshy, ca.
1.5 m m long.
       Capsules woody, brown, glabrous when mature with a faint, raised, reticulate pattern­
ing, obconic, costulate toward the base, 21-25 mm long, 17-24 mm wide ; apex concave,
often with a central umbo, and with a well-defined, angular rim. Seeds ca. 8 x 4 mm,
seed wing ca. 10 x 16 m m .

PI. 2. — Nesogordonia pachyneura Capuron ex L. Barnett : 1, twig in flower ; 2, floral bud ; 3, flower at anthe­
      sis ; 4, fascicle of 4 stamens adnate to a petal ; 5, staminode ; 6, gynoecium ; 7, single carpel of the fruit ; 8
      winged seed. (1-6, Capuron 24535 SF, P ; 7, 8, Capuron 11326 SF, MO).
                                                             — 100 —

      Nesogordonia pachynema is closely allied with N. bernieri Bâillon, with which it shares
small, glabrescent leaves ; inconspicuous secondary venation ; 1-2-flowered inflorescences ;
chartaceous petals ; and a capsule that is sharply rimmed at the apex. Nesogordonia
pachyneura is distinguished by its prominently-swollen midvein raised b o t h above and below
the lamina ; 20 stamens ; large flowers (over 1 cm in length) ; and narrow petals.

      Nesogordonia pachyneura is found in the northern sector of HUMBERT'S (1965)
Domaine de l'Ouest. It occurs from 150-350 m altitude and has been collected in forest
both on limestone (somewhat unusual for the genus), and on sand (the more typical subs-
trate of Nesogordonia species).

       The specific epithet, pachyneura, emphasizes the enlarged midvein characteristic of this
species. CAPURON had annotated several specimens of this new species, although his unti-
mely death did not allow him to publish the name.

       The following common names are non-specific, but have been reported : Hazomena-
« red tree » (Service Forestier 14215 SF) ; Nato- « tree whose bark yields red dye » (Rako-
tosihanaka 139-R-160, Rakotosihanaka 9746 SF, a n d Service Forestier 14215 SF). These
names probably refer to the red inner bark c o m m o n in many Nesogordonia species.

      MATERIAL EXAMINED : Capuron 11326 SF, Forêt d'Orangea, 18.10.1954 (MO, P, TEF) ; Capuron
24535 SF, Sables à l'Ouest d'Ankerika, 7.2.1966 (P, TEF) ; Rakotosihanaka 139-R-160, Canton
Anivorano-Nord, Diégo-Suarez J(ardin) B(otanique) 8 : 17, 28.7.1954 (P) ; Rakotosihanaka 9746 SF,
Forêt de l'Ankara, Km 96, 13.4.1954 (P) ; Service Forestier 128-R-160, Ankarana, Km 96, 25.5.1954
(P, TEF) ; Service Forestier 449-R-6, Forêt de Sahafary, 25.3.1955 (P) ; Service Forestier 5440, Anka-
rana, Diégo-Suarez, 8.8.1952 (MO, P, TAN, TEF) ; Service Forestier 14215 SF, Montagne des Fran-
çais, 12.7.1955 (P, TEF).

      ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS : This work was supported by the United States' National Science Founda-
tion Grant BSR-8414032. I am grateful to the curators of MO, P, TAN and TEF for permitting the
examination of specimens, to P. PARKER for preparing the illustrations, and to B. L. TURNER and
L. J. DORR for carefully editing the manuscript. P. FRYXELL generously provided the Latin diagno-
ses. Research in Madagascar was made possible by a collaboration between the Missouri Botanical
Garden and the Parc de Tsimbazaza, Antananarivo, Madagascar.

                                                                  REFERENCES CITED

CAPURON, R . , 1952. — Identité des genres « Nesogordonia » H . Bn. et « Cistanthera » K. Schum. et
         description de deux espèces nouvelles de Madagascar. Notul. Syst. (Paris) 15 : 258-263.

HUMBERT, H . , 1965. — Description des types de végétation. In HUMBERT, H . & COURS G., Notice de
         la carte, Madagascar. Trav. Sect. Sc. Tech. Inst. Fr. Pondichery, h.s. 6 : 46-78 + map.
                                              Bull. Mus. natn. Hist, nat., Paris, 4 e sér., 9, 1987,
                                                        section B, Andansonia n° 1 : 101-121.

                   Morphologie fonctionnelle de plantilles
                         d'espèces forestières du Gabon

                                                                           S. MlQUEL

            Résumé : D'après l'observation de 210 plantilles d'espèces forestières du Gabon, et une revue
            bibliographique des classifications de types de plantules, cinq types morphologiques de plan-
            tules ont été définis en fonction de la nature et de l'exposition des cotylédons, ainsi que de la
            longueur de l'hypocotyle. Cette diversité morphologique, particulière aux forêts tropicales
            humides, leurs fréquences relatives au sein des populations de plantules et leur survie sont
            analysées en fonction des variations du milieu et des facteurs de germination. Si, selon les
            milieux, certains types de plantules sont favorisés, on les retrouve cependant tous en sous-
            bois forestier.
            Summary : Five morphological basic types of seedlings are described, according to position,
            foliaceous or foodstoring nature of cotyledons, which are, or not, enclosed in seedwall. The
            study of the seedlings of 210 species of Gabon, and a critical review of bibliography substan-
            tiate this classification. The frequency of the different morphological types and rates of sur-
            vival, according to seed size and germination have been related to environmental
            factors. Some of this types may be locally favored by differential light conditions ; never-
            theless the five types are present in the tropical rain forest.

            Sophie Miguel, Laboratoire d'Écologie générale, Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle, 4,
            avenue du Petit château, 91800 Brunoy, France.

       Les plantules et la germination des graines sont les stades-clefs du développement d'une
espèce, stades fragiles, éphémères, mais indispensables dans les processus de sa multiplica-
tion et de sa dispersion. Les études descriptives de plantules o n t été menées sur tous les con-
tinents dans diverses optiques : les inventaires de bois commerciaux (DE L A MENSBRUGE,

1 9 6 6 ; BURGER, 1 9 7 2 ) , la phytogéographie (CERCEAU, 1 9 7 9 ) , la systématique (MARTINEAU,
1 9 3 3 ; LÉONARD, 1 9 5 7 ; D U K E , 1 9 8 1 ) , les problèmes évolutifs (BOKDAM, 1 9 7 7 ; DE VOGEL,
1980 ; YE, 1983).

      Actuellement, l'étude des plantules et de la survie de leurs populations en sous-bois
sont des thèmes fréquemment abordés dans les études de dynamique forestière ( N G , 1 9 7 8 ;

GARWOOD, 1 9 8 3 ; CLARK & CLARK, 1 9 8 4 ; ALEXANDRE, 1 9 8 6 ) . La présente étude est orien-

tée sur ces mêmes problèmes d'adaptation et de compétition au niveau des populations de la
forêt dense, à partir d'observations sur la morphologie et le mode de développement des
différents types de plantules.

      Les observations de terrain ont été effectuées sur 1 8 mois en 1982, 1983, 1985, dans la
                                                                          — 102 —

région de Makokou (Gabon), et portent sur les plantules de 2 1 0 espèces forestières principa-
lement d'arbres, de quelques lianes et arbustes (MIQUEL, 1 9 8 5 ) . La station de recherche de
Makokou est située dans la réserve de la biosphère du programme MAB de l'UNESCO,
près de l'équateur, à 5 0 0 km de la mer, dans la zone de forêt tropicale dense humide du
domaine camerouno-gabonais (AUBRÉVILLE, 1962). La forêt est de type sempervirent, malgré
une pluviosité relativement faible (1760 mm par an), avec 2 saisons sèches dont la plus
grande est de 3 mois, au moment de la plus faible insolation et des plus basses températures
liées à u n e forte nébulosité (in HLADIK, 1 9 8 2 ) . Plus de 1 2 0 0 espèces de Phanérogames ont
déjà été répertoriées dans cette forêt (FLORENCE & HLADIK, 1980, 6 E liste) où sont menées de
nombreuses recherches sur l'écosystème forestier (UNESCO, bilan scientifique, en prép.).

                                        I. T Y P E S M O R P H O L O G I Q U E S D E P L A N T U L E S

1. REVUE DES DIVERS SYSTÈMES DE CLASSIFICATION

       Dans les études sur les plantules, il n ' y a guère unanimité sur le choix des caractères de
classification ; chaque auteur retient ses propres critères selon ses thèmes d'intérêt et les pre-
miers systèmes de classification élaborés à partir des plantules des régions tempérées sont
inadaptés pour décrire la grande diversité morphologique des plantules des espèces tropica-
les.

      — Les classifications les plus anciennes de plantules prennent en compte un seul critère
distinctif, la longueur de l'hypocotyle (portion de tige entre le collet et les cotylédons) déve-
loppé chez les plantules « épigées », réduit chez les plantules « hypogées » (GUILLAUMIN,

1 9 1 0 ; CHADEFAUD, 1960 ; BURGER, 1 9 7 2 ; MERLIER & MONTÉGUT, 1984). Ces termes sont

parfois pris au sens étymologique, hypogé : graine enterrée ; épigé : graine à la surface du
sol (MAURY, 1978) ; cet auteur utilise en synonymie les termes de « hypocotylé » ou « non
hypocotylé » en remplacement des traditionnels épigé ou hypogé.

      — En 1 9 6 5 , DUKE, dans son étude des plantules de Puerto-Rico, ajoute un nouveau
critère de classification qu'il relie à l'écologie du milieu : l'exposition des cotylédons. Il dis-
tingue ainsi les plantules « cryptocotyles » lorsque les cotylédons restent enfermés dans les
téguments de la graine, et les plantules « phanérocotyles » quand les cotylédons émergent
des téguments. Déjà LÉONARD (1957) avait observé ce caractère d'exposition des cotylédons,
mais avait conservé la dénomination épigé — hypogé, créant ainsi une confusion dans l'uti-
lisation de ces termes.

       — En 1 9 7 4 , JACKSON apporte une nouvelle qualification de plantules, « cryptogée »
lorsque l'allongement des pétioles cotylédonaires enfonce le collet sous terre, que les cotylé-
dons soient libres ou cachés.

       — En fait, dans la grande majorité des cas, le caractère épigé est associé à phanéro-
cotyle, hypogé à cryptocotyle, et ces critères sont parfois considérés comme équivalents
                                                                             — 103 —

(HALLÉ, OLDEMAN & TOMLINSON, 1 9 7 8 ; AMO-RODRÍGUEZ, 1 9 7 9 ) . Or, ces caractères ne sont

pas toujours associés et, en 1 9 7 8 , N G fait la synthèse des définitions classiques et de celle de
DUKE en combinant deux à deux les critères cotylédonaires et hypocotylaires pour aboutir à
quatre classes :

       Phanérocotyle-Épigé : Épigé.
       Phanérocotyle-Hypogé : Semi-hypogé.
       Cryptocotyle-Hypogé : Hypogé.
       Cryptocotyle-Épigé : Type « Durian ».

       Ces quatres classes se retrouvent dans les observations de DE L A MENSBRUGE ( 1 9 6 6 ) ,
mais ne sont ni nommées, ni utilisées dans ses descriptions par espèce. Quant à HECKEL
( 1 9 0 1 ) il avait déjà décrit avec précision, sans le nommer, le type de germination « Durian »
chez l'espèce africaine, Ongokea gore.

       — GARWOOD (1983) dans son étude sur l'écologie des plantules de l'île de Barro-
Colorado (Panama), choisit un autre système de classement : la quantité de réserves en
stock après l'établissement de la plantule, selon la nature des cotylédons charnus ou foliacés
ayant fonction de photosynthèse ou de réserve, ainsi que de la durée de persistance des
réserves du jeune individu.

       Hypocotyle développé—Cotylédons libres foliacés.
       Hypocotyle développé—Cotylédons libres charnus.
       Hypocotyle non développé—Cotylédons charnus persistants.

       Dans son étude sur les plantules de Guadeloupe, ROUSTEAU ( 1 9 8 3 ) retient ces trois caté-
gories, complétées par la phyllotaxie des feuilles juvéniles ; le type « Durian » est cité
comme une exception.

       — De son côté, DE VOGEL (1980), dans son étude sur les plantules de Malaisie, élabore
un système de classification totalement différent, et crée 1 6 classes basées sur la morpholo-
gie de la graine (diverses enveloppes, nature des tissus de réserves), les phases de repos dans
le développement, et la phyllotaxie. Les notions d'épigé et d'hypogé sont accessoires, celles
de cryptocotyle et de phanérocotyle sont beaucoup plus détaillées. Il met en doute la nature
cotylédonaire des cotylédons foliacés, les considère comme deux feuilles opposées, et les
nomme « paracotylédons ». Quelques cas particuliers sont pris en compte : plantules sans
cotylédons, plantules parasites, plantules à deux racines, viviparité, plantules à un seul coty-
lédon émergeant, figures difficiles à classer dans les systèmes précédents, mais toutefois très
rares.

      Cette classification qui nécessite des observations de longue durée et une étude anatomi-
que de la graine est difficilement utilisable sur le terrain ; son mérite reste cependant d'être
un des rares systèmes qui, avec celui de Y E ( 1 9 8 3 ) , permet d'envisager les types de plantules
sous un angle évolutif. De même, BOKDAM (1977) accorde la priorité aux caractères à signi-
fication évolutive et classe les plantules chez les Sapotaceae en fonction de la nature des
cotylédons (foliacés, charnus, épaissis) reliée à la présence ou non d'albumen, caractère ana-
tomique à observer uniquement sur la graine avant germination.
                                 — 104 —

2. L E S CINQ TYPES M O R P H O L O G I Q U E S RETENUS

      Dans l'étude présente sur les stades juvéniles des 2 1 0 espèces forestières observées, nous
avons retenu cinq types morphologiques de plantules, en utilisant trois critères aisément
observables lors des récoltes de plantules sur le terrain : l'exposition des cotylédons libres
ou cachés dans les téguments de la graine, le développement de Phypocotyle et la nature des
cotylédons libres, charnus ou foliacés (voir Pl. 1 et liste des espèces en Annexe). Une clef
d'identification a été élaborée à partir de ces caractères (MIQUEL, 1 9 8 5 et à paraître).

1 Phanérocotyle-—Épigé—Cotylédons foliacés épigé-foliacé

2 Phanérocotyle-—Épigé—Cotylédons charnus épigé-charnu

3 Phanérocotyle-—Hypogé                                  semi-hypogé

4 Cryptocotyle—-Hypogé                    : hypogé

5 Cryptocotyle—•Épigé                     : type « Durian »

   T                     ï               j.                                  b        p

1 épigé foliacé  2 épigé charnu  3 semi-hypogë           4 hypogé               5 "Durian"

           Pl. 1. — Cinq espèces de la forêt gabonaise illustrant les cinq types morphologiques de plantules.

      Une telle classification en cinq types de base nous semble la plus fonctionnelle pour
schématiser la diversité morphologique des plantules : elle reprend en partie la classification

de N G ( 1 9 7 8 ) et ajoute la distinction de GARWOOD ( 1 9 8 3 ) sur la nature des cotylédons folia-

cés ou charnus qui nous semble importante ; selon leur nature d'organe de stockage ou de
photosynthèse, leur fonction est différente, leur durée de vie aussi. Dans le cas des plantules
cryptocotyles, il n ' a pas été pris en compte la nature du tissus de réserve, que ce soit le
cotylédon, l'albumen, le périsperme, ou l'hypocotyle, ces organes ayant alors une fonction
identique.
                                   — 105 —

3. FRÉQUENCE RELATIVE DE CHAQUE TYPE DE PLANTULE DANS LA FORÊT DE MAKO-
    KOU

       Nos observations portent sur les plantules de 210 espèces, dont 167 identifiées
(Annexe), présentes dans la mosaïque forestière de la région de Makokou. D'autres travaux
sur les plantules du continent africain ont servi à compléter nos données, au Zaïre (GIL-
BERT, 1939), au Ghana (TAYLOR, 1960), au Liberia (VOORHEVE, 1967), en Côte d'Ivoire (DE
LA MENSBRUGE, 1966 ; DE KONING, 1983). Nous avons retenu principalement les arbres, et
quelques lianes ; par contre, les espèces rudérales et les herbacées (étude des recrus forestiers
des jachères ; MITJA, 1985) n'ont pas été prises en compte.

      Nous avons observé 80 espèces de type 1, 52 espèces de type 2, 20 espèces de type 3, 47
espèces de type 4, et 11 espèces de type 5.

      Les espèces présentant des plantules épigées phanérocotyles sont les plus fréquentes,
avec 39 °?o du type 1 (cotylédons foliacés), et 25 °?o du type 2 (cotylédons charnus). Les
plantules hypogées cryptocotyles (type 4) représentent 22 % ; le type phanérocotyle hypogé
(type 3) est peu fréquent dans cette zone forestière (9 % ) . Le type « Durian » (type 5) est
plus rare (5 % ) , et ne sort pas des zones de forêts tropicales humides à l'exception de 2
espèces citées par N G (1978).

      Dans les forêts tropicales humides d'Asie et d'Amérique, les fréquences relatives de
chaque type de plantule sont du même ordre de grandeur ( N G , 1978 ; GARWOOD, 1983 ;
ROUSTEAU, 1983 ; voir Tableau 1). Par contre, hors de la zone tropicale, les types 3 et 5
sont presque inexistants. Pour DE VOGEL (1980), 95 % de la flore tempérée présentent des
cotylédons foliacés (type 1), les quelques espèces cryptocotyles hypogées étant principale-
ment des arbres et quelques légumineuses.

TABLEAU 1 : Fréquence relative des cinq types de plantules dans le monde tropical.

                     LIEUX         TYPES DE PLANTULES        NOMBRE
                                                            D'ESPÈCES
Afrique, Gabon              1      2     3  4           5   OBSERVÉES
   (Présente étude)
                            39 % 25 <% 9 <% 22 Щ        5%      210
Asie, Malaisie
   (NG, 1978)               . .64        10 <% 18 % 8 %         300

Amérique, Panama            43 Vo 16 <%     . ..41              206

   (GARWOOD, 1983)          51 <7o 16 %     . .31 Уч..  2%      102

Amérique, Guadeloupe

   (ROUSTEAU, 1983)
                                                                            — 106 —

  II. MORPHOLOGIE DES PLANTULES, TAXONOMIE, SEMENCES ET ENVIRONNEMENT

       Le type de plantule, décrit à partir de caractères morphologiques externes, montre peu
de liens avec la position systématique de l'espèce. E n effet, si l'homogénéité du type de
plantule est grande chez les Monocotylédones, presque toujours cryptocotyles, l'hétérogé-
néité des Dicotylédones s'exprime au niveau des familles, et même du genre. Certaines
familles sont homogènes (Myristicaceae, Rubiaceae...) et d'autres sont diversifiées (Anacar-
diaceae, Légumineuses...). Des caractères traduisant l'origine phylogénique de l'espèce sont
présents, mais plus discrets, confirmant l'intérêt des plantules pour la systématique ; en
effet, la nervation, l'anatomie interne, la présence de glandes, etc., caractéristiques d'identi-
fication taxonomique, sont observables dès le stade juvénile. C'est ainsi que LÉONARD
( 1 9 5 7 ) utilise cet ensemble de caractères des plantules pour sa classification des Cynometrae
(Caesalpiniaceae). Chez les Légumineuses ( D U K E , 1 9 8 1 ) , la diversité des types de plantules
est grande, mais en Afrique, les cotylédons libres et charnus sont prépondérants ; en
Europe, c'est parmi les Légumineuses q u ' o n rencontre les rares herbacées cryptocotyles de
la flore tempérée. Certains auteurs souhaitent même faire correspondre à un genre un seul

type de plantule (MARTINEAU, 1 9 3 3 ; GILBERT & LÉONARD, 1954).

      Néanmoins, BOKDAM ( 1 9 7 7 ) suggère que les caractères des plantules (réduction de
l'albumen, exposition des cotylédons, longueur de l'hypocotyle) ont évolué de manière
parallèle dans les différentes lignées, car il montre chez les Sapotaceae des types de plantu-
les différents chez les espèces groupées selon leur morphologie florale. Le type ancestral
généralement proposé est une plantule épigée à cotylédons foliacés, et les cotylédons charnus
sont considérés comme plus évolués (GUILLAUMIN, 1 9 1 0 ; EAMES, 1961 ; BOKDAM, 1977).
Cependant, pour DE VOGEL (1980) et YE (1983), la forme primitive consiste en « cotylédons
suçoirs dans l'albumen », sur le même principe q u e ce qui est proposé chez les Monocotylé-

dones (GRUSHVTTSKYI, 1 9 6 3 , in D E VOGEL, 1 9 8 0 ) .

      D'autre part, DUKE (1969) fait remarquer que le caractère cryptocotyle, qu'il a défini,
est surtout un critère de l'écologie de l'espèce, car fortement lié au milieu, ce qui est con-
firmé par DE VOGEL ( 1 9 8 0 ) et ROUSTEAU ( 1 9 8 3 ) . Aussi nos observations ont porté sur les
relations entre les types de plantules, les semences et l'environnement.

1. TYPE DE PLANTULE ET SEMENCE

       a) Dimension des semences

       La Pl. 2 représente la répartition (en nombre d'espèces) de chaque type de plantule en
fonction de la dimension de la semence, définie par sa plus grande longueur, à l'exception
des graines ailées pour lesquelles la dimension de l'aile n'est pas incluse. Des plus petites
graines (longueur inférieure à 0 , 5 cm) sortent uniquement les plantules phanérocotyles, à
cotylédons foliacés (type 1 ) , exceptées les Monocotylédones. Ces graines, avec peu de réser-
ves énergétiques stockées, nécessitent très rapidement des surfaces photosynthétiques pour
                   — 107 —

    NOMBRE

30  D'ESPÈCES  op      TYPES DE PLANTULES

    op             T1 EPIGÉ COTYLÉDONS FOLIACÉS ( 1 )
                          EPIGÉ COTYLÉDONS CHARNUS ( 2 )

                   SEMI-HYPOGÉ (3)

                   I D HYPOGÉ               (4)

20                 I E "DURIAN" (5)

10                 oo

                                                 qo

     r                                                                        TAILLE DES
                                                                                GRAINES
    0 , 1 À 0 . 5 CM 0 . 5 A 2 CM 2 A 4 CM
                                                 PLUS DE 4 CM

    Pl. 2. — Répartition des types de plantules selon la taille de la graine.

s'établir, par exemple Musanga cecropioides, Harungana madagascariensis, espèces chez les-
quelles la sortie des cotylédons est suivie des premières feuilles très rapidement.

      Pour les graines de 0 , 5 à 2 cm, les types 1 sont dominants ; ensuite pour les graines
supérieures à 2 cm les autres types sont plus fréquents. Les graines de plus grande dimen-
sion ont plus rarement des plantules phanérocotyles à cotylédons foliacés, et davantage des
autres types de plantules, cryptocotyles hypogées. N G (1978) avait déjà noté sur des espèces
asiatiques que la proportion des espèces à cotylédons foliacés diminue lorsque la taille des
graines augmente.

      La taille des graines joue un rôle important dans la quantité de réserves stockées, et
par conséquent sur la capacité de survie de la plantule en sous-bois peu éclairé. Toutefois,
l'analyse de ROUSTEAU ( 1 9 8 6 ) en forêt de Guadeloupe, montrant pour toutes les plantules à
cotylédons foliacés une surface assimilatrice plus faible (cotylédons) que chez les autres
types de plantules (premières feuilles), ne se révèle pas applicable aux espèces étudiées ici ;
les plantules à larges cotylédons foliacés des Omphalocarpum spp., Panda oleosa, Picralima
nitida... issues de graines de grandes tailles, exposent autant de surface photosynthétique
que les premières feuilles des quatres autres types de plantules présents en sous-bois.
                                                                          — 108 —

       b) Délai de germination des graines et type de plantule

       Nous avons comparé, pour les divers types de plantules, les délais de germination des
graines mises à germer en pépinière, aussitôt après récolte, dans des conditions de milieu
supposées favorables. Le délai de germination le plus bref de chaque lot a été retenu, noté à
la sortie de terre de la tigelle.

      Globalement, la germination de ces graines tropicales est rapide, 8 5 °?o des espèces ger-
ment en moins de 2 mois, résultat classique pour les graines de forêt tropicale humide (DE

LA MENSBRUGE, 1 9 6 6 ; N G , 1 9 7 8 ; ALEXANDRE, 1 9 8 0 ; SABATIER, 1 9 8 3 ; VASQUEZ-YANES et

al., 1984). 8 % des espèces observées présentent des délais de germination très variables, de
quelques jours à plusieurs mois (Antrocaryon klaineanum, Trichoscypha abut...) et ces ger-
minations échelonnées sont considérées par N G (1980) comme résultat de « dormances diffé-
rentielles ».

      Les divers types de plantules émergent plus ou moins rapidement de la graine (Pl. 3 ) .
Les plantules phanérocotyles, notamment celles à cotylédons foliacés, ont tendance à pré-
senter des délais de germination plus courts que les autres types de plantules. Il y a moins
d'espèces à cotylédons foliacés (type 1 ) parmi les formes à long délai de germination ( 1 à 2
mois, et plus). Les grosses semences à plantules cryptocotyles ou hypogées ont le plus sou-
vent une germination lente. De la même façon, pour les espèces américaines, DUKE ( 1 9 7 0 )
indique une moyenne de 4 1 jours de délai de germination pour les plantules cryptocotyles,
contre une moyenne de 2 3 jours pour les plantules phanérocotyles.

                                                                          --CO  TYPES DE PLANTULES

          NOMBRE                                                                EPIGÉ COTYLÉDONS FOLIACÉS  (1)
                                                                                EPIGÉ COTYLÉDONS CHARNUS   (2)
20 J D ' E S P È C E S
                                                                                SEMI-HYPOGÉ (3)
                                                                          I
                                                                                HYPOGÉ  (4)

                                                                                "DURIAN" (5)

                                          oo

10
                                                                      oo

                                                                                                                DÉLAIS DE

                                     _^ v _ /                                      ^          ' y-              GERMINATION

1A 1 5 JOURS            1 5 A 30 JOURS 30 A 45 JOURS                            4 5 A 60 JOURS PLUS DE 60 JOURS

Pl. 3. — Répartition des types de plantules selon la vitesse de germination des graines.
                                      — 109 —

2. TYPE DE PLANTULE ET ENVIRONNEMENT

       Pour évaluer le devenir des plantules et l'influence de leur morphologie sur l'écologie
des espèces, nous avons analysé les proportions de chaque type de plantule dans 4 exemples
(Pl. 4) : les formes juvéniles des arbres développés en forêt, de diamètre supérieur à 5 cm ;
les formes juvéniles des arbres de recrus forestiers de moins de 6 ans d'âge ; les plantules
fournies par le stock de semences du sol ; le stock de plantules présent en sous-bois fores-
tier.

      a) Types de plantules des arbres relevés en forêt

      D'après les relevés effectués dans la forêt de Makokou sur 7 2 0 0 m 2 , comprenant 5 6 8
arbres de diamètre supérieur à 5 cm (FLORENCE, 1981 ; HLADIK, 1982), nous avons calculé le
pourcentage de chaque type de plantules présenté par ces arbres lors de leur installation
(voir Tableau 2 et Pl. 4, E).

TABLEAU 2 : Comparaison des fréquences relatives des cinq types de plantules en fonction
      du nombre des espèces et des individus de diamètre supérieur à 5 cm dans la forêt de
      M'passa.

RELEVÉ                                    TYPES DE PLANTULES          Total

                                 1    2        3   4          5

4000 m2        Nombre d'espèces  22   12       5   14         6   30  89

HLADIK, 1982   Nombre d'individus 59  57       21  34         48  66  285

1600 m2        Nombre d'espèces  8    10       1   6          5   9   39

FLORENCE, 1980 Nombre d'individus 15  70       2   11         23  15  136

1600 m2        Nombre d'espèces  8    8        0   9          6   16  48

CABALLÉ, 1980  Nombre d'individus 21  55       0   11         34  26  147

% en nombre d'individus          17 % 3 2 «7o 4 % 10 <% 1 8 % 19 <Vo 568 arbres

       Les espèces à plantules épigées foliacées sont présentes (17 % des individus), mais ne
sont pas les plus nombreuses. Dans ce groupe figurent les espèces pionnières à petits cotylé-
dons fins foliacés tels que chez Musanga cecropioides, Macaranga spp., localisées générale-
ment dans les chablis, et à croissance rapide en milieu favorable. Des espèces à larges coty-
lédons foliacés sont aussi présentes, Gambeya spp., Strombosia spp., dont les phases juvéni-
les se déroulent uniquement en sous-bois.

      Parmi les 3 2 % d'individus à plantules de type 2 se trouvent beaucoup de Légumineu-
ses, abondantes dans les forêts africaines. Le type 3 est relativement rare dans ce milieu
forestier (4 % des individus). RIZZINI (1965) et N e (1978), qui observent fréquemment ce
type en zone de savanes, le proposent comme une adaptation au passage rapide des feux de
savane. JACKSON ( 1 9 7 4 ) mentionne comme une adaptation plus poussée les plantules crypto-
gées qui enfouissent dans le sol la base de leur tige, jusqu'à un mètre chez des palmiers.

      Le nombre d'arbres ayant présenté des plantules hypogées cryptocotyles est faible
( 1 0 % ) , bien que les espèces de ce type soient nombreuses, mais elles sont moins abondantes.

      A l'inverse, le type « Durian », présenté par 1 8 % des individus ( 6 espèces seulement)
se trouve chez des espèces abondantes (Plagiostyles africana, Polyalthia suaveolens). Or ce
type de plantule a pu être présenté par N G ( 1 9 7 8 ) comme « suicidaire », car il est fréquent
en pépinière d'observer une nécrose de la tige causée par la persistance des téguments de la
graine sur l'apex. Il semble q u ' u n e forte humidité soit nécessaire pour éviter le dessèche-
ment de ces téguments et libérer la tige. Dans le sous-bois, l'humidité est constamment éle-
vée et la réussite de ce type de plantule est grande.

      Ainsi, les proportions relatives des 5 types de plantules se révèlent donc différentes si
on considère le nombre global des espèces connues, ou bien le nombre total des plantules
qui ont survécu en un lieu. En nombre d'espèces, les plantules à cotylédons foliacés sont
prépondérantes, par contre, en forêt, elles sont présentes en faibles proportions. Inverse-
ment, les plantules « Durian » appartiennent à des espèces très abondantes.

       b) Types de plantules des espèces arborescentes relevées dans les jachères

       Pour l'étude des types de plantules des espèces arborescentes colonisatrices des milieux
ouverts, nous avons noté les arbres qui recolonisent des plantations en cours de culture ou
abandonnées, 1, 2 , 3 , 6 ans après le brûlis (MIQUEL, 1985). Ces arbres sont issus de graines
stockées dans le sol ou bien apportées ensuite. Nous n'avons pas tenu compte des rejets de
souche, ou des plantes pérennes par leur appareil souterrain.

       Chez ces espèces recolonisatrices des sols après culture, les plantules à cotylédons folia-
cés sont nettement dominantes, plus de 5 0 % des espèces, dans ce milieu ouvert (Pl. 4 , C).
Les autres types de plantules sont en proportions beaucoup plus faibles dans cette végéta-
tion qui recolonise un sol mis à nu, où la compétition est forte avec les herbacées, et l'envi-
ronnement stressant : la température peut varier de 1 5 à 4 5 ° dans la journée, et l'humidité
relative descendre de 1 0 0 à 5 0 %, avec un fort ensoleillement.

       Aux caractéristiques fréquemment citées pour les « espèces pionnières », vie courte,
fructification rapide et continue, dissémination efficace, graines à longue conservation s'ins-
tallant dans les chablis et les milieux ouverts (WHITMORE, 1 9 7 5 ) , on peut ajouter graine de
petite taille, à germination rapide, et à plantule épigée phanérocotyle, à cotylédons foliacés.

       En lisière de forêt, sur un bord de route, les plantules que nous avons récoltées présen-
tent toutes des cotylédons foliacés, et notamment deux espèces, dont la germination difficile
en pépinière révèle des dormances, Xylopia aethiopica et Margaritaria discoidea.

       c) Types de plantules des graines en stock dans le sol

       Tant dans le sol des milieux forestiers, que dans ceux des milieux secondarisés, G U E -
VARA et al. (1972) mettent en évidence la présence de nombreuses graines d'espèces dites
pionnières, et la rareté des graines strictement de forêt, ce qui concorde avec la brève durée
de vie des graines de nombreuses espèces forestières (VASQUEZ-YANES, 1984).

       Dans leur étude des stocks de semence du sol au Ghana, HALL et al. (1980) mention-
nent la présence de toutes les formes biologiques et, parmi les espèces citées dont nous con-
                                                                        — 111 —

 naissons les plantilles, nous trouvons les genres Ficus, Macaranga, Trema, Musanga, Zan-
 thoxylum, Nauclea, Margaritona, présentant tous des cotylédons foliacés. Seules deux
 Monocotylédones font exception, Elaeis et Dioscorea. De même, en Guyane, PRÉVOST
 ( 1 9 8 1 ) constate que les plantules issues de graines stockées dans le sol forestier sont de type
 épigé avec des cotylédons chlorophylliens, permettant un développement rapide. Par contre,
 les autres types de plantules sont rares.

       d) Types de plantules en stock dans le sous-bois forestier
       Pour estimer la composition du stock réel de plantules en sous-bois forestier, nous
avons calculé les proportions des types représentés, sur l'ensemble des plantules relevées en
forêt le long de transects de a o û t à octobre 1 9 8 2 (Pl. 4 , £>). Sur les 5 1 espèces analysées à
partir de 7 1 0 plantules observées, les cinq types morphologiques sont présents. Type 1 :
4 2 % ; type 2 : 2 2 % ; type 3 : 6 % ; type 4 : 1 8 % ; type 5 : 8 % . Ces fréquences relatives
sont du même ordre de grandeur que celles observées pour la totalité des espèces étudiées
(Pl. 4 , A). Cette « Banque de plantules » (BAZZAZ, 1 9 8 4 ) constitue un « stade d'attente »
défini par ALEXANDRE (1977), stade qui peut jouer un rôle dans la conservation de l'espèce
chez des plantes dont la durée de vie des graines est brève.

Pl. 4. — Comparaison des proportions des cinq types de plantules en divers milieux : A, forêt, % en nombre total
      d'espèces observées (210 espèces) ; B, forêt, % en nombre d'arbres de diamètre supérieur à 5 cm (568 arbres) ;
      C, recru forestier sur jachère, % en nombre d'espèces (29 espèces) ; D, stock de plantules en sous-bois, % en
      nombre d'espèces (51 espèces).
                                                                           — 112 —

      La comparaison des proportions observées, entre les espèces présentes au sol au stade
plantule et les formes de jeunesse des individus maintenant adultes, en un même lieu (Pl. 4 )
permet de supposer de notables variations des chances de survie d'un type de plantule à
l'autre. Or dans les études de modélisation de la dynamique forestière à partir des études
sur la démographie des populations de plantules dans son rapport avec l'action des ani-
maux, cette diversité de type de plantule n'est pas toujours prise en compte, a fortiori
lorsqu'un modèle unique est proposé (CLARK & CLARK, 1984).

      Dans les sous-bois des forêts denses où les conditions de croissance sont souvent diffi-
ciles, la résistance aux traumatismes est variable d'un type de plantule à l'autre. Une section
de la tige près du sol est fatale pour les types 1 et 2 , alors que les types 3 et 4 voient le
démarrage des bourgeons cotylédonaires. Chez le type 5 , après une section de l'hypocotyle,
on peut observer la néoformation de nombreuses ébauches de bourgeons dont un seul se
développera au sommet de la tige restante si l'humidité atmosphérique est suffisante, par
exemple chez Polyalthia suaveolens et Mareyopsis longifolia. Certaines espèces possèdent la
capacité de surmonter plusieurs fois ces traumatismes selon la quantité de réserves dont elles
disposent.

      En effet, pour toute plantule, la survie est dépendante de son bilan énergétique : vie
sur les réserves accumulées ou protosynthèse positive. Les réserves énergétiques des plantules
sont situées dans divers tissus : le plus souvent dans les cotylédons charnus, ou dans la
racine, parfois dans l'hypocotyle tubérisé. Les réserves contenues dans l'albumen de la
graine peuvent être transférées dans la racine ou la tige renflée. Ainsi des plantules à cotylé-
dons foliacés (type 1 ) telles que chez Strombosia spp., Strychnos spp., Xylopia spp., dont la
base de la tige est renflée, possèdent aussi des réserves après leur installation.

       Chez les autres types de plantules, on peut aussi rencontrer des tiges renflées (Polyal-
thia suaveolens, Coula edulis, Hannoa klaineanà) ; ces renflements ne modifient pas la sen-
sibilité des plantules aux traumatismes, mais influent sur la durée de survie de la plantule.
De nombreux autres caractères peuvent influer sur la survie des plantules, et notamment la
forme biologique de l'espèce ; ainsi, HLADIK & BLANC (sous presse) montrent que chez des
jeunes plants de sous-bois, les taux de mortalité diffèrent selon la forme biologique (arbre,
liane ou arbuste). C'est pourquoi les durées de survie de populations de plantules, exprimées
en demi-vie, peuvent être variables, allant de 5 mois (SMITH, 1970), à 1 7 mois (LEIGH VAN

VALEN, 1975).

                                                       III. CONCLUSION

       Ces observations ont porté sur les plantules d'espèces ligneuses présentes dans les envi-
rons de Makokou, dans la mosaïque forestière hétérogène de milieux denses et fermés, de
chablis de taille variable, avec ses plateaux et vallons, sur un sol uniforme, ainsi que dans
des recrus en cours de reconstitution après brûlis. Ces plantules sont classées, indépendam-
ment de tout ordre taxonomique, en 5 catégories définies par des caractères morphologiques
externes dont le rôle est discuté selon l'écologie des espèces.

       Ces 5 types de plantules ne représentent qu'un aspect des multiples stratégies d'établis-
                                                                             — 113 —

sèment des espèces, si nombreuses en forêt tropicale humide. En effet, devant la grande
compétition interspécifique qui s'exerce en sous-bois, les espèces présentent un maximum de
diversité dans les formes morphologiques de leurs plantules pour utiliser les multiples possi-
bilités du milieu. Que les plantules soient issues de graines de petites ou de grandes tailles,
que leur germination soit immédiate ou retardée, que leur développement soit lent ou
rapide, toutes auront leur place avec plus ou moins de chance de survie selon leur lieu de
dispersion.

       Dans la grande variété de milieux observés et selon les âges des individus, les propor-
tions de chaque type de plantule varient. Un échantillon du stock de plantules observé dans
le sous-bois présente environ les mêmes proportions de chacun des cinq types que la popula-
tion totale des espèces observées (par ordre décroissant : type 1, type 2 , type 4 , type 3 ,
type 5 ) . Par contre, chez les arbres installés dans la forêt (de diamètre supérieur à 5 cm, sur
7 2 0 0 m2), les espèces ayant eu des plantules à cotylédons foliacés (type 1 ) sont présentes,
mais moins fréquentes, au bénéfice des espèces épigées, à cotylédons libres ou cachés (types
2 et 5 ) . Les taux de survie sont alors variables selon la morphologie initiale.

       Dans les milieux en cours de recolonisation par une végétation ligneuse, après défriche-
ment et culture, ce sont au contraire les espèces possédant des plantules à cotylédons folia-
cés qui sont privilégiées, pour répondre aux contraintes spécifiques du milieu, sécheresse et
luminosité notamment. La banque de graines du sol est principalement constituée de ces
espèces pionnières, à plantules de petite taille, issues de petites graines, et à forte compétiti-
vité. Ainsi, dans la forêt, les stocks de semences du sol et le stock de plantules en sous-bois
diffèrent non seulement par leur composition spécifique, mais encore par leur composition
morphologique. C'est selon les événements de dynamique forestière qui surviendront que
l'un ou l'autre se développera. Pour BAZZAZ ( 1 9 8 4 ) , l'existence d'une « banque de plan-
tules » est un avantage chez les espèces forestières pour échapper à la prédation et aux
agents pathogènes des graines, tout en possédant des réserves énergétiques pour le dévelop-
pement du jeune individu. Les pressions sélectives en zones forestières favorisent ainsi une
grande diversité morphologique des types de plantules, où les conditions de milieux, en fait
variables, ne semblent privilégier ni exclure aucun type particulier.

      REMERCIEMENTS : Mes remerciements s'adressent aux autorités gabonaises qui ont permis le dérou-
lement de ce travail à la station IRET de Makokou, soutenu par le financement de l'UNESCO (Pro-
gramme MAB) et du CNRS (Laboratoire ECOTROP). Mes remerciements vont également à A. HLA-
DIK pour l'aide apportée à l'élaboration de ce travail ainsi qu'à R. LETOUZEY et C. M. HLADIK pour
leur lecture critique de ce manuscrit.

                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHIE

ALEXANDRE, D . Y . , 1977. — Régénération naturelle d'un arbre caractéristique de la forêt équatoriale
         de Côte d'Ivoire : Turraeanthus africana Pellegr. Oecol. Plant. 1 2 ( 3 ) : 241-262.

ALEXANDRE, D . Y . , 1980. — Caractère saisonnier de la fructification dans une forêt hygrophile de
         Côte d'Ivoire. Rev. Écol. {Terre et Vie) 3 4 : 335-350.

ALEXANDRE, D . Y . , 1986. — Croissance et démographie des semis naturels en forêt de Taï. Côte
         d'Ivoire. Mém. Mus. natn. Hist. nat., Sér. A Zool.', 132 : 193—200.
                                                                          — 114 —

AMO-RODRIGUEZ, S., 1979. — Clave para plantulas y estados juveniles de especias primarias de una
         selva alta perenifolia en Veracruz, Mexico. Biotica 4 (2) : 59-108.

AUBRÉVTLLE, A., 1962. — Position chorologique du Gabon. Flore du Gabon 3 : 3 - 1 1 , Muséum d'His-
         toire Naturelle, Paris.

BAZZAZ, F . A., 1984. — Dynamics of wet tropical forest and their species strategies. In : Physiological
         ecology of plant on wet tropics ; Proc. Mexico 2 9 june/6 July 1983.

BOKDAM, J., 1977. — Seedlings morphology of some African Sapotaceae and its taxonomical signifi-
         cance. Meded. Landbouwhogeschool Wageningen 11 (20), 8 4 p.

BURGER, D. HZN., 1972. — Seedlings of some tropical trees and shrubs mainly of South East Asia.
         Center for Agricultural Publishing and Documentation, Wageningen, 3 3 9 p.

CERCEAU-LARRIVAL, M. T H . , 1979. — Intérêt de l'ontogénie pour la classification évolutive d'une
         famille : série foliaire des Ombellifères. Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. 126, Actual. Bot. 3 : 39-54.

CHADEFAUD, M. & EMBERGER, F . , 1960. — Traité de Botanique systématique. Masson éd., 2 t.,
         1016 p. & 1540 p.

CLARK, D. A. & CLARK, D. B., 1984. — Spacing dynamics of a tropical rain forest tree : Evaluation
         of the Janzen Connel model. The American Naturalist 124 (6) : 769-788.

DUKE, J. A., 1965. — Keys for the identification of seedlings of some prominent woody species in
         eight forest types in Puerto-Rico. Ann. Missouri Bot. Garden 5 2 ( 3 ) : 314-350.

DUKE, J. A., 1969. — On Tropical tree seddlings. Ann. Missouri Bot. Garden 5 6 (2) : 125-161.
DUKE, J. A., 1970. — Post irradiation woody seedlings. In : ODUM, A Tropical rain forest, US Ato-

           mic Energy : 189-192.

DUKE, J. A. & POLHILL, R. M., 1 9 8 1 . — Seedlings of leguminosae. In : POLHILL & RAVEN, Advances

         in Legume systematics, éd. 2 : 941-949.
EAMES, A. J., 1961. — Morphology of the Angiosperms. Mc Grow Hill Book Co. Inc, New York,

         518 p.
FLORENCE, J., 1 9 8 1 . — Chablis et sylvigenèse dans une forêt dense humide sempervirente du Gabon.

         Thèse 3 E Cycle, Univ. Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, 2 6 1 p.
FLORENCE, J. & HLADIK, A., 1980. — Catalogue des Phanérogames du N.E. du Gabon (sixième liste).

           Adansonia, ser. 2 , 2 0 : 2 3 5 - 2 5 3 .

GARWOOD, N. C , 1983. — Seed germination in a seasonal tropical forest in Panama. A community
         study. Ecol. Monographs 5 3 : 159-184.

GILBERT, G., 1939. — Observations préliminaires sur la morphologie des plantules forestières du
         Congo Belge. I.N.E.A.C., Ser. Scient. 1 7 : 1-28.

GILBERT, G. & LÉONARD, J., 1954. — Importance des plantules pour la délimitation des genres.
         8e Congrès Int. Bot. Paris, Rapp. et Comm. Sect. 2-6 : 4 9 - 5 0 .

GRUSHVITSKYI, I. V., 1963. — Subterranean germination and the function of the cotyledons. Bot.
         Zhurnal 4 8 (6) : 906-915 (Russian).

GUEVARA, GOMEZ-POMPA, 1972. — Seeds from surface soils in a tropical region of Veracruz, Mexico.
         J. Arnold Arbor. 5 3 : 312-335.

GUILLAUMIN, A., 1910. — L'étude des germinations appliquées à la classification des genres et à la
         phyllogénie des groupes. Rev. Gén. de Botanique 22 : 449-468.

HALL, J. B. & SWAINE, M. D., 1980. — Seeds stocks in Ghanaian forest soils. Biotropica 12 (4) :

           256-263.

HALLE, F . , OLDEMAN, R. A. A. & TOMLINSON, P. B., 1978. — Tropicals trees and forest : An archi-
         tectural analysis. Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg and New York, 4 6 1 p.

HECKEL, E., 1901. — Sur le processus germinatif dans les genres « Onguekoa » et Strombosia de la
         famille des Olacaceae. Ann. Mus. Colon. Marseille 8 : 17-27.
                                                                           — 115 —

HLADIK, A., 1982. — Dynamique d'une forêt équatoriale africaine. Mesures en temps réel et compa-
         raison du potentiel de croissance des différentes espèces. Acta Œcologica, Œcol. Gêner. 3 ( 3 ) :

           373-392.

HLADIK, A. & BLANC, P. (sous presse). — Croissance des plantes en sous-bois de forêt dense humide
         africaine (Makokou, Gabon).

JACKSON, G., 1974. — Cryptogeai germination and other seedlings adaptations to the burning of sava-

         nas regions : the origin of the pyrophytic habit. New Pathol. 7 3 : 771-780.

KONING, J . DE, 1983. — La forêt du Banco. Med. Landbouwhoschool Wageningen 8 3 ( 1 ) : 9 3 1 p.

LEIGH VAN VALEN, 1975. — Life death and energy of a tree. Biotropica 7 ( 4 ) : 260-269.
LÉONARD, J . , 1957. — Genèse des Cynometrae, Légumineuses Caesalpiniaceae. Essai de blastogénie

         appliquée à la systématique. Mém Acad. Roy. Belg., Classe des Sciences 3 0 (2) : 1-312.
MARTINEAU, G., 1933. — Note sur les Lophira de forêt et de savane. Rev. Bot. Appl. Agr. Trop. 1 3 :

           467-469.

MAURY, G., 1978. — Dipterocarpaceae : du fruit à la plantule. Thèse doctorat d'état, Univ. Toulouse,
         2 vol., 4 3 2 et 3 3 4 p.

MENSBRUGE, G. DE LA, 1966. — La germination et les plantules de la forêt dense humide de la Côte
         d'Ivoire. CTFT, n° 2 6 , 3 8 9 p.

MERLIER, H . & MONTEGUT, J . , 1984. — Adventices tropicales. ORSTOM/GERDAT/ENSH, Ministère
         des relations extérieures, coopération et développement, 4 9 0 p.

MIQUEL, S., 1985. — Plantules et premiers stades de croissance des espèces forestières du Gabon :
         Potentialité d'utilisation en Agroforesterie. Thèse 3 E Cycle, Univ. P. & M. Curie, Paris, 158 p.

MITJA, D., 1985. — Analyse des recrus forestiers dans les jachères à Makokou (Gabon). DEA Univ.
         P. & M. Curie, Paris, 95 p.

NG, F. S. P., 1978. — Strategies of establishment in Malayan forest trees. In : P. В . TOMLINSON &
         H . M. ZIMMERMAN, Tropical trees as living systems, Cambridge univ. Press : 129-162.

No, F. S. P., 1980. — Germination ecology of Malaysian woody plants. Malaysian Forester 4 3 (4) :

           406-437.

PRÉVOST, M. F., 1981. — Mise en évidence de graines d'espèces pionnières dans le sol de forêt pri-
         maire en Guyane. Turrialba 3 1 (2) : 121-127.

RIZZINI, C. T., 1965. — Experimental studies on seedlings development of cerrado woody plants. Ann.
         Missouri Bot. Garden 5 2 ( 3 ) : 410-426.

ROUSTEAU, A., 1983. — 100 plantules d'arbres de Guadeloupe : Aspects morphologiques et écolo-
         giques. Thèse 3 E Cycle, Univ. P. & M. Curie, Paris.

ROUSTEAU, A., 1986. — Les plantules d'arbres forestiers de Guadeloupe : adaptations structurales et
         dimentionnelles. Mém. Mus. nat. Hist, nat., Sér. A Zool., 1 3 2 : 185-192.

SABATIER, D., 1983. — Fructification et dissémination en forêt Guyannaise : L'exemple de quelques
         espèces ligneuses. Thèse, Montpellier, USTL, 2 t., 2 3 7 p.

SMITH, R. F., 1970. — The vegetation structure of a Puerto Rican rain forest before and after short
         term gamma irradiation. In : A tropical rain forest, US Atomic Energy : 103-140.

TAYLOR, C. J . , 1960. — Synecology and silviculture in Ghana. Univ. of Ghana, Thomas Nelson &
         son LTD.

UNESCO (en prép.). — Station de Makokou. Réserve de la Biosphère de Ipassa (Gabon). Présenta-
         tion des travaux scientifiques.

VASQUEZ-YANES, C. & OROZCO-SEGOVIA, A., 1984. — Ecophysiology of seed germination in the tro-
         pical humid forest of the world : a review. In : Physiological ecology of plant on wet tropics,
         Proc. Mexico 2 9 june/6 July 1983.

VOGEL, E. F. DE, 1980. — Seedlings Of dicotyledons. PUDOC ed., Wageningen, 4 7 1 p.
                                                                           — 116 —

VOORHEVE, A. G., 1967. — Liberian hight forest trees. Belmontia miscellanous. Pub. in Botany 8,
         416 p.

WHITMORE, T. C., 1975. — Tropical forest of the far East. Oxford university press, London, 282 p.
YE, N., 1983. — Studies on the seedling type of dicotyledonous plants (Magnoliophyta Magnoliop-

         sida). Phytologia 54 (5) : 161-189.

                        ANNEXE : Liste des espèces observées

Taille des graines :                             Délais de germination (en jours)
   A : moins de 0,5 cm
   B : de 0,5 à 2 cm
   C : de 2 à 4 cm
   D : plus de 4 cm

                                                     TYPE     TAILLE   DÉLAI MINIMUM
                                                                 DES             DE
                                                        DE
                                                              GRAINES    GERMINATION
                                                 PLANTULES

AGAVACEAE                                                                          40

Dracaena arborea (Willd.) Link                                C                    10-200

ANACARDIACEAE                                                 D                    30

Antrocaryon klaineanum Pierre                                 C                    15-45
A. nannanii De Wild.
Pseudospondias longifolia Engl.                               C                    18-100
Trichoscypha abut Engl. & V. Brehm
T. acuminata Engl.                                            C                    15-60

ANNONACEAE                                                    C                    30

Anonidium mannii (Oliv.) Engl. & Diels                        B
Friesodielsa enghiana (Diels) Verd.
Isolona letestui Pellegr.                                     B
Pachypodanthium barteri (Benth.) Hutch. & Dalz.
P. Staudtii Engl. & Diels                                     B                    40
Polyalthia suaveolens Engl. & Diels
Uvariopsis solheidii (De Wild.) Rob. & Ghes.                  B                    30
Xylopìa aethiopica (Dunal) A. Rich.
X. letestui Pellegr.                                          B                    100
X. quintasii Engl.
X. staudtii Engl. & Diels                                     B                    50

APOCYNACEAE                                                   A                    70

Aphanostylis mannii (Stapf) Pierre                            B
Dictyophleba stipulosa (Moore ex W.) Pichon
Picralima nitida (Stapf) Th. & H. Dur.                        B                    30
Pycnobotrya nitida Benth.
Strophantus sarmentosus DC.                                   B

                                                              B

                                                              B                    18

                                                              C                    20

                                                              C                    25

                                                              A
— 117 —

                                                      TYPE    TAILLE  DÉLAI MINIMUM
                                                        DE      DES             DE

                                                  PLANTULES  GRAINES    GERMINATION

BIGNONIACEAE                                      1          B        10
Markhamia sessilis Sprague
                                                  1          A
BORAGINACEAE
                                                  1          B        5-30
Cordia sp.
                                                  1          C
BURSERACEAE
Aucoumea klaineana Pierre                         2          C        30
Canarium schweinfurthii Engl.
Dacryodes buettneri Engl.                         2          C        18
D. edulis (G. Don) Lam
D. klaineana (Pierre) Lam                         2          B        17
D. macrophylla (Oliv.) Lam
Santina sp.                                       2          C        20

CAESALPINIACEAE                                   2          C        3-14
Afzelia bipendensis Harms
Detarium macrocarpum Harms                        2          B        13
Distemonanthus benthamianus Baili.
Griffonia physocarpa Baili.                       2          D        65
Guibourtia tessmannii (Harms) Léonard
Scorodophloeus zenkeri Harms                      1          C
Swartzia fistuloides Harms
sp.                                               3          B        38

CH RYSOBALANACEAE                                 2          C
Parinari excelsa Sabine
                                                  2          C        10
COMBRETACEAE
Combretum bipendense Engl. & Diels                1          B        12
C. sp.
Terminalia calappa L.                             3
T. ivorensis A. Chev.
                                                  4          D        90
COMMELINACEAE
                                                  1          C
Pollia sp.
sp.                                               1          A

CONNARACEAE                                       1          D        26
Hemandradenia mannii Stapf
Roureopsis obliquifoliolata Schellen.             1          B        28
sp.
                                                  4          A        60
CONVOLVULACEAE
Dipteropeltis poranoides Hallier f.               4          A
Neuropeltis sp.
                                                  2          C        30
DICHAPETALACEAE
Dichapetalum heudelotii (Planch. & Oliv.) Baili.  3          B        77
D. integripetalum Engl.
                                                  3          B        70

                                                  1          A

                                                  1          A        8

                                                  4          B        3

                                                  4          B
— 118 —

D. monbuttense Engl.                             TYPE    TAILLE  DÉLAI MÍNIMUM
D. thollonii Pellegr.                                      DES             DE
D. unguiculatum Engl.                               DE
D. sp. 1                                                GRAINES    GERMINATION
D. sp. 2                                     PLANTULES
                                                            B         60
DILLENIACEAE                                      4         B         40
                                                   4        B         50
 Tetracera alnifolia Willd.                       4         B
                                                   1        B         15
DIOSCOREACEAE                                      1
Dioscorea sp.                                                         35
                                                        B
DIPTEROCARPACEAE                                                      13
                                                        A             39
Marquesia excelsa (Pierre) R. E. Fríes                  A             20
                                                        B
EUPHORBIACEAE                                           B             180
                                                                      75
Alchornea floribunda Muell.-Arg.                        c             90-180
Bridelia sp.
Crotón oligandrus Pierre ex Hutch.                      B             14
Dichostemma glaucescens Pierre                          B
Drypetes sp.                                            B             26
Klaineanthus gaboniae Pierre ex Prain                   B             26
Macaranga barteri Muell.-Arg.                           A             180
M. spinosa Muell.-Arg.                                  B
Mareyopsis longifolia (Pax) Pax & K. Hoffm.             B
Margaritaria discoidea (Baill.) Webster                 B
Phyllanthus polyanthus Pax
Plagiostyles africana (Muell.-Arg.) Prain    4          c
Uapaca sp.
                                             4          c
FLACOURTIACEAE
                                             4          c
Caloncoba welwitschii (Oliv.) Gilg
                                             4          D
GUTTIFERAE
                                                        B
Garcinia polyantha Oliv.                                C
G. sp.                                                  B
Mammea africana Sabine
Pentadesma butyracea Sabine                             D

HERNANDIACEAE

Illigera pentaphylla Welw.

HIPPOCRATEACEAE

Loeseneriella sp.
Salada sp. 1
S. sp. 2

HYPERICACEAE

Harungana madagascariensis Lam. ex Poir.

ICACINACEAE
Lavigeria macrocarpa (Oliv.) Pierre
                                      — 119 —

                                                               TYPE    TAILLE  DÉLAI MINIMUM
                                                                 DE      DES             DE

                                                           PLANTULES  GRAINES    GERMINATION

IRVINGIACEAE                                                                         15
                                                                                     45
Irvingia gabonensis Baill.                                            D              180

I. grandifolia Engl.                                                  D              22

Klainedoxa gabonensis Pierre                                          D              20
                                                                                     10
LAURACEAE                                                                            17
Beilschmiedia sp.
                                                                                     7
LECYTHIDACEAE                                                                        112

Petersianthus macrocarpus (P. Beauv.) Liben                           C               10
                                                                                      17
Napoleonaea vogeleii Hook. & Planch.                                  B              24-40
                                                                                     5-12
LILIACEAE                                                                            7
                                                                                      15
Asparagus warneckei (Engl.) Hutch.                                                   40

LOGANIACAE

Anthocleista schweinfurthii Gilg                                      A

Strychnos sp. 1                                                       B

S. sp. 2                                                              B

MARANTACEAE
sp.

MELIACEAE

Guarea sp.                                                            B

Entandrophragma sp.                                                   B

Lovoa trichilioides Harms                                             B

Trichilia prieureana A. Juss. subsp. vermoesenii De Wild.             B

Turraea cabrae De Wild. & Th. Dur.                                    A

MENISPERMACEAE

Stephania sp.

MIMOSACEAE                                                 2          A

Adenanthera sp.                                            2          B
Albizia sp.
Cylicodiscus gabunensis Harms                              2          D
Entada gigas Fawcett & Rendle
E. scelerata (A. Chev.) Gilbert et Boutique                3          D
Fillaeopsis discophora Harms
Parkia bicolor A. Chev.                                    2          B
Pentaclethra eetveldeana De Wild. & Th. Dur.
P. macrophylla Benth.                                      2          D
Piptadeniastrum africanum Brenan
Tetrapleura tetraptera Taub.                               2          B

MORACEAE                                                   3          C

Ficus sp.                                                  3          D
Musanga cecropioides R. Br.
Myrianthus arboreus P . Beauv.                             2          B
Treculia africana Decne.
                                                           2          B

                                                                      A
                                                                      A
                                                                      B
                                                                      B
                                           — 120 —

                                                        TYPE    TAILLE  DÉLAI MINIMUM
                                                          DE      DES             DE

                                                    PLANTULES  GRAINES    GERMINATION

MYRISTICACEAE                                       4          C                55
                                                                                50
Coelocaryon preussii Warb.                          4          C                40
Pycnanthus angolensis (Welw.) Exell
Staudtia gabonensis Warb.                           4          c                50

MYRTACEAE                                                                        18
Syzygium sp.
                                                                                200
OCHNACEAE                                                                        10
Lophira alata Banks ex Gaertn.                                                   100

OLACACEAE                                                                       150
                                                                                40
Coula edulis Baili.                                            c                300

Heisteria parvi/olia Sm.                                       B                300

Ongokea gore Pierre                                            c                15
                                                                                20
Strombosia spp.                                                B                45

PALMAE                                                                          100

Ancistrophyllum secundiflorum (P. Beauv.) Wendl.               B                15
                                                                                20
Calamus derratus Mann & Wendl.                                 D                18

Elaeis guineensis Jacq.                                        D                50

PANDACEAE

Microdesmis puberula Hook, ex Planch.                          A

Panda oleosa Pierre                                            D

PAPILIONACEAE

Baphia leptobotrys Harms                                       B

Dalbergia hostilis Benth.                                      B

Pterocarpus soyauxii Taub.                                     B

Dalhousiea africana S. Moore                                   B

PASSIFLORACEAE

Passiflora foetida L.                                          A

RHAMNACEAE

Maesopsis eminii Engl.                                         C

RUBIACEAE

Atractogyne gabonii Pierre                                     A

Massularia acuminata (G. Don) Bulloch ex Hoyle                 A

Nauclea diderrichii (De Wild.) Merr.                           A

RUTACEAE
Zanthoxylum gillettii (De Wild.) Waterman

SAPINDACEAE

Allophylus cobbe (L.) Raeusch.                                 B

Blighia welwitschii (Hiern) Radlk.                             C

Chytranthus angustifolius Exell                                B
— 121 —

Eriocoelum macrocarpum Gilg                             TYPE    TAILLE   DÉLAI MINIMUM
Pancovia pedicellaris Radlk. & Gilg                       DE       DES             DE

SAPOTACEAE                                          PLANTTJLES  GRAINES    GERMINATION
Baillonella toxisperma Pierre
Gambeya africana (G. Don) Pierre                          4         B         40
G. beguei Aubrév. & Pellegr.                              4         B
G. lacourtiana (De Wild.) Aubrév. & Pellegr.                                   50
Omphalocarpum sp.                                   2           D
Synsepalum letestui Aubrév.                                                    36
Tieghemella africana Pierre                         1           B              37
                                                                               80
SIMAROUBACEAE                                       1           B              95
Hannoa klaineana Pierre & Engl.
Quassia gabonensis Pierre                           1           c              30-300
                                                                               4
STERCULIACEAE                                       1           D
Cola acuminata (P. Beauv.) Schott & Endl.                                       11
C. nitida (Vent.) Schott & Endl.                    3           B
C. rostrata K. Schum.                                                          48
C. sp. 1                                            4           D
C. sp. 2                                                                       8-34
                                                                B
STYRACACEAE                                                     D              25
Afrostyrax lepidophyllus Mildbr.                                               90
                                                                C              3
TILIACAE                                                        C
Duboscia macrocarpa Bocq.                                       D              55
Grewia coriacea Mast.                                           C              40
G. sp. (cf. malacocarpa K. Schum.)                              B

ULMACEAE                                                        B
Celtis tessmannii Rendle
Trema guineensis (Schum. & Thonn.) Ficalho                      A
                                                                B
VITACEAE                                                        B
Cissus diffusiflora (Bäk.) Planchon
C. dinklagei Gilg & Brandt                                      B
                                                                A
VOCHYSIACEAE
                                                                A
Erismadelphus exsul Mildbr. (sans doute 2 espèces)              B

ZINGIBERACEAE                                                   A
Aframomum giganteum (Oliv. & Hanb.) J. Koech.                   A
Renealmia sp.
                                                              Achevé d'imprimer le 18 septembre 1987.
Le Bulletin du 4e trimestre de l'année 1986 a été diffusé le 5 juin 1987.

                                          IMPRIMERIE NATIONALE

                                   7 564 001 5
                   BULLETIN DU MUSEUM NATIONAL D'HISTOIRE NATURELLE

      Fondé en 1895, le Bulletin du Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle est devenu à partir de 1907 : Bulletin du
Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle. Des travaux originaux relatifs aux diverses disciplines scientifiques repré-
sentées au Muséum y sont publiés. Il s'agit essentiellement d'études de Systématique portant sur les collections
conservées dans ses laboratoires, mais la revue est également ouverte, depuis 1970 surtout, à des travaux traitant
de divers aspects de la Science : biologie, écologie, etc.

      La 1" série (années 1895 à 1928) comprend un tome par an (t. 1 à 34), divisé chacun en fascicules regroupant
divers articles.

      La 2e série (années 1929 à 1970) a la même présentation : un tome (t. 1 à 42), six fascicules par an.
      La 3' série (années 1971 à 1978) est également bimestrielle. Le Bulletin est alors divisé en cinq Sections et les
articles paraissent par fascicules séparés (sauf pour l'année 1978 où ils ont été regroupés par fascicules bimestriels).
Durant ces années chaque fascicule est numéroté à la suite ( n o s 1 à 522), ainsi qu'à l'intérieur de chaque Section,
soit : Zoologie n o s 1 à 356 ; Sciences de la Terre, n o s 1 à 70 ; Botanique, n o s 1 à 35 ; Écologie générale, n o s 1
à 42 ; Sciences physico-chimiques, n o s 1 à 19.
      La 4' série débute avec l'année 1979. Le Bulletin est divisé en trois Sections : A : Zoologie, biologie et écolo-
gie animales ; B : Botanique (fusionnée en 1981 avec la revue Adansonia) ; C : Sciences de la Terre, paléontologie,
géologie, minéralogie. La revue est trimestrielle ; les articles sont regroupés en quatre numéros par an pour cha-
cune des Sections ; un tome annuel réunit les trois Sections.

          MÉMOIRES DU MUSÉUM NATIONAL D'HISTOIRE NATURELLE

      Collection à périodicité irrégulière, se subdivisant depuis 1950 en quatre séries spécialisées : A, Zoologie ;
B, Botanique ; C, Sciences de la Terre ; D, Sciences physico-chimiques.

Dernières parutions dans la série B :

T. 28. ROQUEBERT, M.-F. — Analyse des phénomènes pariétaux au cours de la conidiogenèse chez quelques cham-
      pignons microscopiques. 1981, 79 p., 23 f. de pl. : 14 fig., 4 tabi.

T. 29. KEDDAM-MALPLANCHE, M. — Le pollen et les stomates des Gardéniées (Rubiacées) du Gabon : Morpholo-
      gie et tendances évolutives. 1985, 109 p., 45 fig., 16 pl., 18 tabi.

T. 30. ALLORGE, L. — Monographie des Apocynacées-Tabernaemontanoïdées américaines. 1985, 216 p., 76 pl.
T. 31. PONCY, O. — Le genre Inga (Légumineuses, Mimosoideae) en Guyane française. 1985, 153 p., 37 fig.,

' il pl.  1                            '

          PUBLICATIONS DE L'ASSOCIATION DE BOTANIQUE TROPICALE (A.B.T.)

(Laboratoire de Phanérogamie du Muséum, 16, rue Buffon, 75005 Paris, tél. 43.36.47.25. CCP La Source
     33.075.20 W).

        — Flore de Madagascar et des Comores, 92 vol. parus.
        — Flore du Gabon, 29 vol. parus.
        — Flore du Cambodge, Laos et Viêt-Nam, 22 vol. parus.
        — Flore de Nouvelle-Calédonie et dépendances, 14 vol. parus.
        — Flore du Cameroun, 29 vol. parus (les 20 premiers). Commercialisée par le Cameroun à partir

             du vol. 21. (S'adresser à Monsieur le Directeur de l'Herbier National, B.P. 1601, Yaounde).

     PUBLICATIONS DE L'ASSOCIATION DES AMIS DES CRYPTOGAMES (A.D.A.C.)
(Laboratoire de Cryptogamie du Muséum, 12, rue Buffon, 75005 Paris, tél. 43.31.35.21).

         — Cryptogamie, Mycologie (CCP Paris 6.193.02 K)
         — Cryptogamie, Bryologie et Lichenologie (CCP Paris 4.481.43 T)
         — Cryptogamie, Algologie (CCP Paris 14.522.31 T)
